The Project Gutenberg eBook of Yuletide entertainments, by Ellen M.
Willard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Yuletide entertainments
       Christmas recitations, monologues, drills, tableaux, motion
       songs, exercises, dialogues and plays

Author: Ellen M. Willard

Release Date: April 9, 2023 [eBook #70515]

Language: English

Produced by: Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
             Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YULETIDE ENTERTAINMENTS ***






                                 YULETIDE
                              ENTERTAINMENTS

                    CHRISTMAS RECITATIONS, MONOLOGUES,
                     DRILLS, TABLEAUX, MOTION SONGS,
                          EXERCISES, DIALOGUES,
                                AND PLAYS

                          SUITABLE FOR ALL AGES

                                    BY
                             ELLEN M. WILLARD
                                AUTHOR OF
     _“The Favorite Book of Drills,” “Fun for Little Folks,” “Little
                Plays with Drills,” and “Pictured Readings
                              and Tableaux”_

                              [Illustration]

                                 CHICAGO
                         T. S. DENISON & COMPANY
                                PUBLISHERS

               COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY T. S. DENISON & COMPANY

                             MADE IN U. S. A.

                        _Yuletide Entertainments_




CONTENTS


                           PART I.

    RECITATIONS, MONOLOGUES, DRILLS, MARCHES AND MOTION SONGS.

    Bell Song, The                                          24
    Christmas Every Day                                      7
    Cranberry March                                         26
    Dance of the Holly and Mistletoe                        28
    Fred’s Christmas Shopping                                9
    Hollyberry Drill                                        32
    In Grandma’s Day                                        11
    Old Aunt Dinah’s Christmas                              18
    Pickaninny’s Christmas, The                             34
    Pop-corn Dance                                          37
    Sleighbell Drill, The                                   41
    Too Much Christmas                                      20
    We Know                                                 20
    What Counts                                             21

                          PART II.

       DIALOGUES, EXERCISES, MUSICAL PIECES AND PLAYS.

    All the Year ’Round                                     45
    Boy’s Christmas, A                                      49
    Christmas Bargain, A                                    51
    First Christmas, The                                    57
    King of the Year, The                                   61
    Mrs. Randy’s Christmas                                  72
    Ready for Santa Claus                                   80
    Santa Claus’ Garden                                     87
    Santa Claus in Many Lands                               93
    Spirit of Christmas, The                               101

The songs in this book are to be sung to old airs that are presumably
familiar to everyone. If any of them should prove unfamiliar, however,
the music will be found in Denison’s “_Songs Worth While_,” one of the
best arranged and most carefully edited collections of old favorites
ever published. This book is beautifully printed on non-glossy paper,
measuring 10¼ by 7 inches, and is well bound in a stout paper cover done
in colors. It may be obtained from the publisher for the price of $1.00,
postpaid.




INTRODUCTORY


It becomes more and more a part of Christmas gayety to present the
legends, or the spirit of it, to the eye as well as the mind.

For this purpose the following pages have been prepared in play and
pantomime, songs and marches, drills and recitations.

While the needs of adults have not been forgotten, those of the children
have been most largely remembered, since Christmas is pre-eminently the
children’s festival.

A word to those who take charge of such affairs may not be amiss.

Precision of movement is the keynote of success for everything of this
kind. This does not mean stiffness, but it does mean exactitude and
certainty. Uncertain gestures in speaking; scattered attack and close in
singing; hesitation in acting; and, more than all, careless motions and
marching in the drills (corners not formed squarely, motions only half
in unison, etc.)—all these are fatal to that success which makes such
entertainments entertaining.

Here, as everywhere else, “What is worth doing at all, is worth doing
well.”




YULETIDE ENTERTAINMENTS




PART I.

Recitations, Monologues, Drills, Marches and Motion Songs




CHRISTMAS EVERY DAY.


    Dear little Dorothy Dill Magee
    Had a very beautiful Christmas tree;
    And on it were hung the loveliest things,
    Dolls, and sashes, and gloves, and rings,
    Till nothing more, you would have thought,
    Could possibly have been wished or sought.
    But little Dorothy Dill Magee,
    Although delighted as she could be,
    Began to sob, to sniffle and cry
    Because the day was so near passed by.
    “I wish it was always Christmas Day,”
    Little Dorothy Dill was heard to say.
    Then what did round old Santa do
    But pop right in through the chimney flue,
    And say to Miss Dorothy Dill Magee
    “Just as you wish I will make it be:
    And I’ll tell every one of your friends and mates
    That Christmas, to you, is of many dates.”
    So Dorothy Dill forgot to cry,
    And mourned no more when the day passed by,
    But went to bed to dream of all things,
    From dolls to fairies with gossamer wings.
    The following morning stockings hung
    By the side of her bed, and toys were strung
    Beside the fire, and Dorothy Dill
    Jumped up to explore with a right good will.
    She had so many nice things that day
    That she could do nothing but play and play.
    But when night came with its Christmas tree
    She was just as tired as she could be.
    She scarcely could open her sleepy eyes,
    And didn’t see half of her rich surprise.
    When Dorothy Dill again awoke
    The bulging stockings were like a joke,
    A tiresome joke, and Dorothy sighed
    With frowning brow at the gifts at her side.
    She looked them over but couldn’t play,
    And turkey and pudding at dinner that day
    Weren’t good at all, and the Christmas tree
    That night was horrid as it could be.
    The troubles that followed I couldn’t rehearse,
    For Dorothy’s Christmas grew worse and worse.
    She had so many sashes and rings,
    So many fine dresses and all such things,
    That closets and drawers couldn’t hold them all;
    She flung them on the floor of the hall,
    “I hate the sight of them all,” quoth she.
    And as for the turkey and Christmas tree,—
    “They’re the pest of my life,” Miss Dorothy cried,
    “I dread just the name of the Christmas tide.”
    The dolls of all sizes came by the dozens
    From uncles and aunts, from playmates and cousins.
    Little dolls, big dolls, china and wax,
    With dresses of reds and yellows and blacks.
    Under the tables, and chairs and bed,
    In closets, on stairs, those dolls were spread.
    She gave them, and gave them, and gave them away,
    And not with any of them could she play;
    And she was so tired of the Christmas trees
    She wished they were covered in deepest seas.
    And as to the letters and words of thanks,—
    They crowded before her, ranks upon ranks,
    And begged to be written and said until
    They seemed her whole mind to crowd and fill.
    Now what Miss Dorothy Dill Magee
    Did with her every-day Christmas tree,
    And her every-day turkey, and pudding and pie,
    I never have heard; but let’s you and I
    Be just as thankful as we can be
    That we have but one jolly Christmas tree.




FRED’S CHRISTMAS SHOPPING.

_A Monologue for a Boy of Ten or Twelve Years._


_Enters with arms full of bundles; begins talking while he puts them down
on the table._

FRED. Say! But this Christmas shopping wears on a fellow! How in thunder
the girls stand it—shopping the way they do—I can’t see.

If I had all the money in creation it wouldn’t be much better, for a
fellow never knows what to get for the other fellow, you see.

There’s Sis, now—big Sis, I mean, of course—the little ones don’t count
much. It took me the whole afternoon to think of something for her.
She’s got most everything that counts for anything, like skates. All
the fixings girls wear she don’t want, of course. She’s got plenty of
jewelry—I _did_ think some of a carnelian ring for her—and finally
I thought of just the thing. (_Tugs at a big candy box in his coat
pocket, holds it up._) Candy! Yes, sir; that’s one thing a girl can
never have too much of. And I got it all in licorice and gum drops,
good, chewy ones—and “jawbreakers”—kinds that will last a while. (_Nods
emphatically._)

There’s a train of cars for little Sis (_indicating packages as he
talks_). I think after Christmas I’ll build a track and make some
semaphores and switches—and a bridge—and a station-house—all for those
cars. ’Course _I_ don’t care for cars, but I think it would be real fun
to fix ’em all up for little Sis. And I’ll show her how to run ’em,
too. “Dolls,” did you say? Oh, pshaw! She don’t want any more dolls.
Cars are lots better. And Baby—’course he must have something, so I got
him one of those funny faces that squeak. Say, do you know, I laughed
till I was tired making that go through its performances. Squints one
eye (_illustrating_), you know, and twists its mouth. Why, you’d laugh
yourself to see it. Guess I’ll take it to school and show the boys on the
sly. Won’t there be a rumpus, though? Gee!

I couldn’t leave out Cook Nora, so I got her that (_showing cookie
cutter_). Good hint for some cookies, _I_ think, and a joke into the
bargain.

And here’s a ball for Bill. (_Bounces it._) A number one. He lost mine
last week. Now I can borrow his.

This (_unwrapping a gay tissue paper parcel and showing a large candy
heart_) is for Nellie—she’ll like it. She’s pretty nice—for a girl—and
she thinks I’m great!

And here’s the best of all. (_Shows a knife, opening its many blades._)
And who do you guess it’s for? Why, _Mother_, of course. I always give
her a knife every Christmas. I always lose ’em, and so I am bound to get
her another, you know. Now that’s the best one I ever got for her—four
blades and a corkscrew! My! But that’ll be fun!

And Father—when I got to him I had only a nickel left, and couldn’t think
of a thing, so I finally bought him a pipe. (_Shows a clay pipe._) I know
he don’t use that kind, but I thought it might do if he lost the other.
I only had a nickel, and anyhow it’ll be just fine for soap bubbles. Oh,
Christmas shopping isn’t so bad, after all.




IN GRANDMA’S DAY.

_Illustrated with Eight Tableaux. Directions at Close._


_This is recited by the “Grandma,” who sits and knits as she talks, with
pauses when the tableaux are shown. She speaks slowly, in a reminiscent
way, adapting her actions to the words._

_During the showing of the tableaux she leans her head on her hand, or
looks ahead of her, not at them, as if dreamily thinking of the pictures
her memory calls up._

    It’s cold today, and Christmas time is getting very near.
    I wish I knew just what to do to help the season’s cheer.
    Things nowadays have grown so strange that I am puzzled quite.
    I wonder if they care at all that Christmas comes tonight.

    Son John has grown so gray and tired; he used to beg to hear
    The Christmas stories—he and Bess. How sweet they were—and dear!

(NO. 1 TABLEAU—_The Stories._)

    I told them of the blessed Child who in the manger lay.
    Without these stories, so he said, it wasn’t Christmas day.

    But now his children do not care to have these stories told;
    They go to Christmas parties, and they, too, look tired and old.
    They do not romp and jump about as children used to do,
    They dance at “balls,” and go to “clubs” until it makes me blue.

(NO. 2 TABLEAU—_Children at Ball._)

    The Christmas stockings have gone out of present fashion quite;
    I wonder if they care at all that Christmas comes tonight.
    Has John forgotten? He is tired and worn with business cares—
    But every night I used to hear the children say their prayers.

(NO. 3 DOUBLE TABLEAU—_John and Prayers._)

    And when the blessed Christmas Eve came with its cold and snow,
    They used to hang their stockings round the fireplace in a row.
    What fun it was! How happily they planned for Christmas Day!
    How hard to wait for morn to come to light their merry way.

(NO. 4 TABLEAU—_Children with Stockings._)

    His children now are grown-up people, proper, most polite.
    They never hang up stockings, that is nonsense in their sight.
    The little son has bank notes, and the girls some jewels gay;
    A sober “thank you,” or a frown are what they bring the day.

    Paul fills his time with wondering why mother gave him “_that_,”
    And Helen wishes she had had instead “that stunning hat.”

(NO. 5 TABLEAU—_Children Discontented._)

    Oh, deary me! How sweet ’twould be to have them at my knee,
    A-listening to the sweet old tales that mine once heard from me.

    Now when _I_ was a little girl, I had my stockings hung
    At Christmas Eve beside the fire, and Christmas songs were sung.
    And after breakfast, Christmas Day, to church we all must go
    And hear the Christmas sermon—it was rather long, I know.

    But then, I always liked it, because, just back of me,
    Sat Philip Deane, and he and I were dearest chums, you see;
    And after church we walked back home together, he and I.
    I used to think when he was near the sermons weren’t so dry.

(NO. 6 TABLEAU—_Grandma and Philip._)

    Dear Phil! He grew so tall and strong—the handsomest of all.
    I remember how he danced with me at Susan Elmer’s ball.
    On Christmas was our wedding day, and I remember still
    How Philip bent above me then—how clear his words, “I will.”

(NO. 7 TABLEAU—_Wedding._)

    And every Christmas after that grew fuller of earth’s joys
    As to us came the blessed gifts of darling girls and boys.
    How long ago it seems—and yet—I always hold them dear,
    Those memories so full of love and sweetest Christmas cheer.

(No. 8 FINAL TABLEAU.)


DIRECTIONS.

    CHARACTERS—Seven Children, Five Adults.
    _Children_—Two Boys, Three Girls.
    _Adults_—Two Males, Three Females.

Group No. 1 signifies the boy and girl shown in tableau No. 1. Their
costume is the old-fashioned style.

Group No. 2 signifies the boy and girl shown in tableau No. 2. Their
costumes are modern.

By using these two groups and retaining the two styles of costume,
the tableaux are much simplified, as group No. 1 retains the original
costume, only putting a night dress or outdoor garments over it as
required. Group No. 2 does not change.

Fewer can be used if necessary, but it will add greatly to the ease
and quickness of presenting the tableaux if the full number indicated
are used. By doing this very few changes in costume are required, and
the characters, being all dressed, or requiring but little change, the
tableaux can be quickly arranged.

[Illustration: STAGE.]

    A-A-A—Curtains or screens.
    B-B—Frames.
    C-C—Curtains.
    G—Grandma’s chair.
    X and Z—Platforms.

One frame or setting can be used if the manager has her pictures well
in mind; but as the illustrations or tableaux must be arranged quickly
in order to be shown just at the proper moment, it will be easier and
wiser to have two frames or settings, so that one picture can be placed
while the other is being shown to the audience. The order of arrangement
following will insure the best results.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1._ _Fig. 2._]

These settings should be frames of light timbers. See Fig. 1. The inner
opening is seven feet high by eight feet wide and the outer dimensions
two feet wider. This frame should be covered with a black cloth and a
gray gauze stretched across the opening. The space behind the frame
should be curtained or screened at the back and sides with black or dark
gray. Fig. 2. The floor behind the frame should be raised two feet in
order to bring it well into view of the audience, and of course the frame
must correspond. The pictures are arranged between the frame and the
screens.

The frame and gauze _can_ be omitted, and the picture presented in the
space surrounded by the screens or curtains; but of course the _best_ way
is the one indicated.

With all accessories ready, and some previous rehearsals, these tableaux
can be easily and rapidly presented.

In front and to one side the Grandma sits in an easy chair. No other
accessories. The tableaux are presented in the settings described above,
either one frame in the middle of the stage and about four feet back, or
two frames set as in Fig. 3.

TABLEAU 1—On platform X.

Young mother sitting, facing audience. Plain, dark dress, kerchief or
lace crossed over bosom, hair in low knot at back of neck and brushed
smoothly over the ears in the manner of ante-bellum days.

Boy of eight or ten stands at her left, his arm over her shoulder, her
left arm around him. He is dressed in long, narrow trousers, white
stockings and low slippers, frilled white shirt front, short jacket (to
the waist only), wide collar and bow tie.

Girl of six or eight sits on stool or low chair, leaning on the mother’s
lap, looking in the mother’s face as the mother looks down at her. Any
dress with short “baby” waist and short sleeves. Hair in two smooth
braids or loose curls.

TABLEAU 2—On platform Z.

Boy and girl from eight to twelve years dressed in extreme of modern
style party costumes. He has her hand held high and they are in the
attitude of some figure of the Lancers. Their bearing is sober and
indifferent. These are children No. 2.

TABLEAU 3—

This is double and both curtains can be drawn at the same time. On
platform Z sits “Son John,” a middle-aged man, gray, well dressed. He is
in an office chair or an arm chair, his elbow on the table, his head on
his hand. His attitude and face show weariness as he sits thinking.

On platform X, prepared while tableau No. 2 is being prepared and shown,
children No. 1 kneel at the same mother’s knee in prayer. They are in
white nightgowns and a small white bed is back of them. (This may be
omitted.) If one frame only is used divide it by a movable screen, giving
the single figure but one-third the space.

TABLEAU 4—Children with stockings. Platform X.

The back of the space represents a fireplace. Painted scenery can be
used, or a framework to indicate it, with andirons in the fireplace. No
fire needed. Two bulging stockings hang by the fireplace; one is small
and has a doll showing in the top of it, and a very small child in
nightdress is reaching up her arms to the doll.

The other girl in nightdress is sitting on the floor examining the
contents of her stocking, with toys lying around her.

The boy, dressed as in tableau No. 1, is astride a rocking-horse in
attitude of driving; or he is blowing a trumpet with one hand, while he
drums with the other on a drum which is hung around his neck.

TABLEAU 5—Platform Z. Group No. 2.

Same costume as before. They sit facing each other (not too near). The
boy has one hand in his pocket, leans lazily back in his chair and looks
crossly at an open pocketbook held in the other hand.

The girl wears much jewelry and has an open jewel case in one hand and a
watch and chain in the other, at which she looks scowlingly.

TABLEAU 6—Platform Z. Group No. 1.

Dress as in tableau No. 1, but with the addition of outdoor garments.
These should be of the “Kate Greenaway” type, pictures of which can be
seen in children’s books. They walk side by side, her hand in her muff,
he holding out to her a candy heart. They are smiling shyly at each other.

TABLEAU 7—Platform X.

Wedding scene. Parson (who may be same one who personated “John” in
tableau No. 3) in Episcopalian gown and bands, holding a prayer-book and
looking at the couple before him. He stands at one side of the frame and
close to it, slightly turned away from the audience, so that the bridal
couple may _partly_ face the audience.

The groom is tall and handsome, dressed in Colonial style, with white
stockings, low buckled shoes, white satin knee breeches, long vest and
long-skirted coat (color to choice), with wide lace ruffles at wrists and
down the shirt front. He wears his hair long, powdered and tied behind
with a black ribbon.

The bride is small and slender, dressed in full Colonial costume, with
veil, etc. She either looks down or smiles up at him.

TABLEAU NO. 8—

This is a double tableau, both platforms and curtains being used, and
both pictures being shown at once.

On platform Z “Son John” stands just behind his children (group No. 2)
and all look imploringly at Grandma and hold out their arms to her.

On platform X the bride and groom stand back at one side, his arm around
her, both smiling at Grandma. A double gauze should hang before them
_inside_ the frame, so that they are but dimly seen.

Group No. 1 stand together at the right front of the space and both reach
their arms to Grandma as they smile at her.

CURTAIN.




OLD AUNT DINAH’S CHRISTMAS.

A MONOLOGUE.


Go way fum hyar, chile! How you s’pose I gwine git ready fer Sandy Claws
ter come if you chillun keeps a-hangin’ eroun’?

Doos Sandy Claws bring dem Chris’mus gif’s? Sho he do. Does _I_ put gif’s
inter dem stockin’s, too?

Laws! Yo’ jes’ talkin’ foolishness. How Sandy Claws gwine fill yer
stockin’s ef dar ain’t no stockin’s dar I like ter know? An’ ain’t I de
one dat mends ’em? Co’se I hangs up de stockin’s. Yer kaint ’spect Sandy
Claws ter tote a passel ob stockin’s ’roun’ wid him. Don’t he be good
’nuff ter put tings in ’em I lak ter know?

You Pete! Ef yer opens dat ar drawer yer gwine cotch it sho’!

What’s in dar? Dat’s fer me ter know an’ you ter guess, mo’ ’special jes’
eroun’ Chris’mus.

Why kaint yer see? What’s dat? Ef Sandy Claws brungs de gif’s huccome I
wants ter hide anyt’ing? See yhar, chile! Some dese days yo haid gwine
ter bus’ clar open wid its sma’tness. Oh, go ’long off an’ ’muse yerse’f.
Yer tongue hung in de middle an’ wags hese’f all ways ter wunst.

’Lisbeth Maude! Leave my wu’k basket ’lone, will yer? Yo tink dat look
lak er doll dress, hey?

Yo’ jes’ better onhook dem eyes ob yourn f’um whar dey don’t b’long.

Ya-as. Dis Chris’mus Eve, sho’. Ya-as, Sandy Claws gwine come yere ef
yer’s _good_. He ain’ gwine come whar de chilluns is bad an’ don’ min’
dey ma, an’ axes er lot ob fool questions.

Ma’y Bell! Quit teasin’ dat baby! Ain’t yer ’shame yerse’f? Yo ’spec’
Sandy Claws gwine brung anyt’ing to a leetle gal what—Abram Lincoln! Git
outen dat cupboard! Quick, I say! My lan’! Ef I jes’ kin git er holt er
yo’ fer five minutes I’m gwine mek yer dance! Yas sar! Yer _better_ cla’r
outen yhar!

Genevieve Blanch! Come yhar an’ wit dese chilluns an’ chuck ’em in baid!
I’s plumb wore out, an’ ef dey axes any mo’ ob dere fool questions I
gwine ter ex-plode! An’ den whar’ll Chris’mus be at?




TOO MUCH CHRISTMAS.


    Christmas every day! Oh, what fun ’twould be.
    With all the gifts and all the fun and jolly Christmas tree!
    And yet, I’m not quite sure, we might get tired enough
    Of fancy things and fol-de-rols and all the Christmas stuff
    If it should come so often; and so, perhaps, it’s true
    To keep it just the way it is I think is best, don’t you?

    Christmas every day! One thing I can see
    That all the gifts and all the sports and jolly Christmas tree
    Can’t make us glad if we are bad and selfish and unkind.
    Perhaps one way to make each day like Christmas we may find
    Is just to _feel_ like Christmas toward each one that we may see,
    And make it happy, like that day, wherever we may be.




WE KNOW.

_Recitation for Two Very Little Children._


    We are just two little children,
    Too small to work or sew,
    But we know when it’s Christmas,
    And what it’s for we know.

    And we know what we’re good for;
    It’s just to grow and grow,
    And be two little children
    For you to love and know.

    So, Santa, dear old Santa,
    Please come here soon, for oh!
    We’re waiting and we’re waiting
    Because we love you so.




WHAT COUNTS.

A MONOLOGUE.


_BETTY HOLLOWAY is a girl ten years old, and her mother is a widow with a
large family whom she supports by making buttonholes. They are very poor,
and Christmas is coming._

_BETTY (speaks)._

Yes, Christmis is a-comin’, and I feel worser and worser the more it
keeps a-comin’.

Ma an’ me we had all sorts of fun planned out, ’coz I’ve been helpin’
much as I could, and we’ve been savin’ up for Christmis.

Then what did Buddy do but go an’ break his arm, and that cost lots.
(_Sighing._) Yes—I know—the doctor didn’t charge nuthin’, but the drug
store man did, ’coz Buddy had fever and had to have medicine to stop it.

And Benny (that’s Buddy’s twin), he wasn’t goin’ to be left behind, so he
broke a winder playin’ ball, and ma paid for it. And it was hard work to
keep ’em from fightin’; ’coz Bud he said a broke arm was worst, and Ben
he would have it a broke winder was worst—cost as much, anyhow.

(_Suddenly._) Betty Holloway! What you whinin’ about? Cryin’ ’fore you’re
hurt, are you? (_Scornfully._) Didn’t know you was _that_ kind. What did
ma tell you the other day?

“’Taint what comes to us, Betty,” she said, “It’s how we take it when
it comes that counts,” she said. “We can’t sit down and cry, not one
of us; we’ve all _got_ to count for something. All of us.” My! When ma
talks like that, with her eyes shinin’ and her lips smiley, it makes me
think of the band goin’ by; you can’t help marchin’ in time and walkin’
straight, and you feel like you could tackle anything.

Well, sir, I’m goin’ to tackle Christmis, and I’ll make it _count_, now
you see. With all these children on our hands ma ’n’ me has to hustle,
but we’ll never let Christmis go and nothin’ doin’.

Now, le’s see. “When you ain’t got money you got to make your know-how
and your hands do instead,” ma says. That’s true _this_ time if it never
was before. (_Looks at her hands._) Ten fingers—and that’s all. (_Shakes
head doubtfully, then cheerily says:_) Ho, you Betty! Where’s your
know-how? Stir that up a bit and get to work. Well—first of all there’s
the twins. They’re always playin’ store. I’ll make ’em a store. I’ve got
a box the grocer gave me yesterday, and that shall have shelves in it,
and a counter; and I know where to get some little bottles, and I’ve got
two cardboard boxes, big ones, and I’ll make no end of things out of
’em—little boxes and scales, and sugar-scoop—’n’ lots of things. Sand
shall be sugar, and plenty of things will do for spice and coffee, and
such. Oh, you’ll see! It’ll be a nilligant store. I don’t b’lieve that
one in the toy store is much nicer. And I can make paper bags, and—oh,
what fun! And _won’t_ they be tickled!

Then, besides the store I’ll make ’em some paper soldier caps. Ma gave
me some be-u-tiful paper last week; it came around a bundle of work. And
some badges—I’ve got some silver paper that come ’round some chocolate
once—I found it; it’ll make beauty badges. Oh, I tell you! They’ll be
so fine they can hardly step. Stripes down their trousers, too. Why, I
couldn’t get ’em anything that would tickle ’em more if I had a whole bag
of money. And this won’t cost a cent.

Then there’s Jennie and Bess. They’re not twins, but they might just as
well be. They’re just of a size, if one is older ’n the other, and they
look just alike, and they want to do the same things.

’Course it’s dolls for them. I had meant to get ’em some of those dear
little ones with real hair and arms and legs that move. Oh, dear!
(_Sighs. Then, straightening up._) Keep your whinin’ in your pocket,
Betty. I’ve told you that before. I’m makin’ this Christmis _count_ for a
good time, and whinin’ isn’t part of a good time; so keep it still, I say.

Well—about the dolls—let’s see. Oh, _I_ know. I’ll make ’em a playhouse.
I’ve got lots and lots of cardboard spool boxes, and you’d be s’prised to
see what dandy things they make; beds, and chairs, and sofys—why, I can
make everything a doll house could want. Dolls will have to be rag ones
of course, which isn’t so very stylish; but then! The house will be so
fine they’ll hardly notice the dolls, I guess. So that settles it for the
girls.

Then there’s the baby. He’s most three and such a dear! But sakes alive!
He’s easy. Why, a little box with a string to it makes a fine wagon. And
I can make him a nilligant ball out o’ bright pieces. And I’ll ask Mr.
Sweeny if I may go into his planing mill and pick up some little blocks;
there’s all sorts of cute-shaped ones there. Oh, baby’ll be happy.

Now, I haven’t got a tree, and I can’t get one—there’s no use talking
about it—but I can get a couple or so of barrel hoops and trim ’em up
with paper fringe and things, and tie the little things to ’em. They’ll
look real Christmis-y hung up on the wall, and the store and playhouse
can be underneath. And I’ve got a red bell I saved from last year. I can
make it real pretty! And as to candy and such, the youngsters may get
some at the Sunday School, and I’ll coax ’em to let me save it for ’em,
and I’ll trim things up with it.

And ma (_stops and looks troubled_). Ma _must_ have something, she’s so
good. Why—sir! My mother is as brave as ever a soldier was! Talk about
battles! If my mother doesn’t have as hard things to do as if it was
battles I would just like to know. She deserves Christmis more ’n any
of ’em. But, oh, dear! _What?_ Well, I know how to make a dear little
paper-fold tray for pins, and I’ll make a big bunch of twisted tapers;
they’re awful handy, and they save matches, you know. And—le’s see. Yes,
I’ll make a whole bunch of paper flowers. Hooray! That’s a great idea.
They won’t fade, and they’ll stay pretty better ’n the real ones. Oh,
goody, goody! Won’t we have a lovely Christmis?

Mother’s right. She always is. “’Taint what comes to us, it’s how we take
it that counts.”

I thought at first we couldn’t have any Christmis, and here we’re going
to have a perfectly lovely one.

Me? Presents for _me_? Oh, _I_ don’t need presents. I’m going to have all
the fun of makin’ ’em and some more fun seein’ the others have ’em. And
when my mother looks at me with that shine in her eyes and says, “Betty,
you’re my comfort,” the way she does, do you s’pose there’s any gift in
the whole world could make me feel so glad?

Oh, Christmis is great, all right, but a mother like _my_ mother—what
_counts_—beats all your Christmises holler. Merry Christmis!




THE BELL SONG.

_Chorus for Thirteen Children._

_They may be all boys, all girls or both together, and there may be as
many additional as desired._


SONG.

_Tune: “Jingle Bells.”_

    Hear the Christmas bells as they gayly ring.
    And our voices join as merrily we sing.
    All the world is glad, hearts with joy are light,
    For ’tis the best of all the year and Christmas comes tonight.

                         CHORUS.
    Merry bells, merry bells, ring, oh, ring today.
    Oh, how happily we sing, for joy is on the way.
    Christmas bells, Christmas bells ring your music sweet,
    While our hearts keep merry time to children’s dancing feet.

    Tender are our thoughts, tears we bid depart,
    Happiness we long to bring to every saddened heart.
    Join us as we sing, banish every tear,
    Christmas is the dearest time that comes in all the year.

                         CHORUS.

    Pain is banished quite, sorrow goes away,
    Anger dares not show his head on this glad Christmas Day.
    Peace o’er all the earth, good will to all men,
    Is the song the angels sang, we sing it here again.

                         CHORUS.


DIRECTIONS.

The leader should be older than the others if small children are chosen.
He carries a triangle, the others an inch wide red ribbon two feet long,
with six small sleighbells sewed on each ribbon. Be sure and have the
bells small, as otherwise the number of them makes their accompaniment
too loud.

These ribbons are held by the ends with both hands.


COSTUMES.

No elaborate costumes are required, but as some uniformity of dress is
always effective, white dresses with red ribbons, for the girls, and dark
suits with holly berries or knots of red ribbon in the coat lapel for the
boys, would add much to the effect.

Or, all might dress in outdoor costume with fur caps, mittens, etc.


MARCH.

Enter at rear, center or either side.

1. March in single file all around the stage during the first stanza.
Let all shake the bells _once_ on the first beat of each measure as they
march.

2. During chorus let the leader strike his triangle on the first beat
of each measure. One-half of the other shake the bells once on first
beat, and the other half on the third beat of each measure. At the word
“way” (which is slurred through a whole measure) the leader strikes his
triangle once for each beat, thus making four strokes; and at the word
“children’s dancing feet” he does the same, and all shake or tinkle their
bells through the last two measures. During the chorus the children halt
and face front, while they keep time to the music as they sing.

3. At second stanza step backward diagonally, first with right foot, then
with left foot on alternate beats of the music, at the same time swing
the body and the bells in the direction the steps are taken. The leader
stands before the line, facing the audience, and steps as the others do,
waving his triangle to right or left, but not striking it.

At chorus the line halts and keeps time with the music as before.

4. At the third stanza the line advances to the front with the same step
and motions as during the second stanza, only in a forward direction.

Chorus as before.




CRANBERRY MARCH.

_For Sixteen Children, Boys or Girls, or Both._

_Costume all of scarlet, the boys in blouse waists, and knickerbockers,
the girls’ dresses with long or short sleeves as desired. All wear
scarlet stockings and slippers and pointed scarlet caps._


SONG.

_Tune: “The Drum-Major of Schneider’s Band.”_

    When the Christmas time is here with all its cheer and frolic dear,
    Then we come to help the fun at merry Christmas time.
    Other things may welcome be, but only we can bring such glee,
    Nothing else can fill the place of ripe red cranberries
        Christmas! Oh, jolly Christmas!
        We come to you in Christmas pies.
          So fine the stringing,
            Our gay beads bringing,
              Each child is singing
                Of cranberries.

        And on the Christmas tree we glow,
        In festoons gay we grow.
    In every part of Christmas time we share,
    We help to drive away all pain and care,
    For we grace the glorious Christmas tree,
    Pies and tarts we fill right juicily.
        Yes, with the Christmas light
        We gleam like blossoms bright.
    And on the Christmas tree is gay red cranberry
        A-shining and a-twining on the tree.


DIRECTIONS FOR MARCH.

1. Enter at left rear in couples—march across rear.

2. Front face—march to front of stage in two rows.

3. Retreat to rear in same order.

4. Left face—march to rear right corner, turn to right, march diagonally
to left front corner, in single file, alternating from each row in turn.

5. Turn to left—march across front of stage, changing at the turn to
couples.

6. Retreat to rear in same order.

7. March to front of stage.

8. Divide—four couples at each side swing back to sides, the right and
left end couples serving as pivots.

9. Both sides march to center—when they meet, halt; mark time vigorously.

10. Retreat to sides.

11. Swing to front.

12. Separate, facing right and left, march in couples to sides, take
single file, march to rear, across rear to rear center.

13. As they meet at center each faces front and the lines march down
center to front of stage; repeat 12 and 13, then march in couples around
the stage.

14. As the couples reach the rear center they march in single file until
a ring is formed, and when the end of the stanza is reached all, as
suddenly as possible, step into the circle and stoop down in a solid,
circular figure, thus forming the “pie.” Remain still until the curtain
is drawn.




DANCE OF THE HOLLY AND MISTLETOE.

_For Eight Young Girls, or the Number May Be Doubled._

_Costumes at close._


DANCE.

_Music: Waltz with marked accent, moderate tempo._

C means center; F means front; wreaths position means wreaths held low in
front, one hand at either end of wreath. The number of measure given to
each figure must be determined by the music and its phrases.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1._ _Fig. 2._]

1. Enter in couples at rear, wreaths in position, waltz step. Sway
wreaths from side to side in unison with the step. Dance to center, turn
to front; there separate to right and left. Fig. 1.

2. When in a line across the front of the stage, halt, front face,
salaam. This last is a bow, bending from the waist forward, the wreath
held low with both hands.

3. To position, ends of line retreat to form a circle, facing outward.
Wreath in both hands behind the head. Fig. 2.

4. Right face—wreath overhead—dance in a circle, swaying the body and
wreath alternately to right and left. (This swaying body means bending
from the waist to one side or the other.)

5. Circle faces in. Wreath in right hand and high so that the ends of
all wreaths touch in center. Left hands on neighbor’s shoulder. Dance,
without leaving place, toward the center and back, through one or more
measures.

6. Break line on side toward audience, retreat to rear, wreaths position.

7. Dance forward in even line to front, wreath back of the head.

8. At front the odd numbers kneel, wreaths back of the head; the even
numbers dance around the others twice, Fig. 3, swaying wreaths over
their heads from side to side. Let this swaying be done in unison by all
dancing.

[Illustration: _Fig. 3._]

9. Those kneeling rise; all dance backward to the rear, swaying wreaths
right and left with the step.

10. The even numbers now form a line from R. to F. down the center.
In this way No. 2 dances in front of the line to R. center, then down
middle of stage to positions indicated in Fig. 4. Number 4 follows her,
and 6 and 8 do the same. These sway their wreaths overhead alternately
with the odd numbers, who dance in serpentine around them, swaying their
wreaths overhead. This serpentine is led by No. 1, who dances to the rear
center, then, passing to the right of No. 8, begins the serpentine as
shown by Fig 4. When No. 1 passes to the right of No. 8, No. 5 passes to
her left. They cross between 8 and 6 and are followed by 3 and 7, and the
serpentine is continued around 4 and 2. This is continued until the odd
numbers have reached the front, gone back to the rear, passed around No.
8 and danced again to the front.

[Illustration: _Fig. 4._ _Fig. 5._]

When No. 1 has completed this figure she dances again around No. 2, then
in a straight line, and close to the standing numbers, back to the rear,
and to her position. No. 3 follows her. Nos. 5 and 7 turn at the left of
No. 2 without going around her, and also dance in a straight line to the
rear, and to their places.

11. Line across rear; wreath in position.

12. Odd numbers stand, wreaths held behind head. Even numbers right face,
sway wreaths before them, dance twice around those standing.

13. Couples link arms, hold wreaths overhead to form an arch, waltz in
this way to front, and back to a line midway of the stage.

14. Two couples on either side form cross, Fig. 6, crossing hands in
center, holding wreaths over shoulders with free hand. Those at right of
stage cross right hands and dance to right; the others the reverse.

[Illustration: _Fig. 6._]

15. Break circles, retreat to rear, wreaths position.

16. Repeat No. 8.

17. Repeat No. 10, except that as numbers 1 and 5 reach the rear, they
stand facing each other and hold their wreaths high to form an arch
between them. Nos. 3 and 7 dance behind them, pass under the arch, then
stop to either side and make an arch with their wreaths.

So, in turn, do the others. Then 1 and 5 lower their wreaths, dance under
the arch, and again stand and help form the arch, until the front of the
stage is reached. Here the dancers pass to right and left and dance back
to the exit, and out, swaying wreaths overhead.


DIRECTIONS.

Let the alternate numbers represent holly and mistletoe. All wear dresses
of soft material (cheesecloth or silkaline), falling full from a yoke to
the ankles. Bare neck and arms are prettiest with this costume, but if
not desired have plain sleeves to the elbow, finished with a six-inch
frill of the same, and the neck finished without a collar.

The holly girls should be brunettes and wear dresses of bright green, as
near the color of the holly leaf as can be had, with a sash of scarlet
ribbon about three inches wide tied and fastened there, high under the
arms, “empire” style, with long loops and ends tied in front. A narrow
scarlet ribbon should be tied with loops and short ends around the sleeve
just above the elbow. A wreath of holly leaves and the bright berries on
the head and around the neck of the dress. These should not be heavy.
Stockings and slippers scarlet.

The mistletoe girls must be blond and dress in the same style as the
holly girls; but their dresses are white, their ribbons and slippers pale
green, and the wreaths are of mistletoe with its white berries.

Each girl carries a half wreath (the half of a barrel hoop is right for
size) covered with holly or mistletoe to match her dress.




HOLLYBERRY DRILL.

_For Ten or Twelve Little Girls._


A prettier drill for small children can scarcely be prepared. Costumes
are of simple white, with red ribbons and stockings, and hollyberry
wreaths in the hair.

Each carries a wreath of holly and its red berries and a fancy basket
filled with bits of paper cut fine to represent snow. The girls enter in
time to a lively march, in couples, each carrying her wreath lifted high
in the hand toward her mate, and the basket held in the free hand. Enter
at left rear.


DRILL.

1. Couples advance to rear center of stage, set baskets down.

2. By couples, down center to front.

3. Couples separate, march round on either side to rear.

4. Lines meet at rear center, pass, march down opposite sides to front,
meet and pass, back to rear.

5. Lines meet again at rear center, front face, advance to front in a
single line across the stage with curtsey step.

In this step the right foot is advanced a step forward and to the right
on first count, right knee bent in a curtsey on second count, left foot
advanced a step forward and a little to the left on third beat, and the
left knee bent in a curtsey on fourth beat, etc.

The wreath is held up a little above the face and swayed to the right or
left in unison with the foot which is advanced.

6. When the line reaches the front of the stage, the wreath is held
over the head with both hands, and the children retreat to the rear by
skipping.

7. Down center in couples to front; wreaths held high to touch mate’s
wreath.

8. Couples separate; march either side to rear.

9. Lines meet. Then each line or side forms in a group by itself, the
free hands clasped and crossed in the center, the wreaths held above the
head.

10. Both groups then skip around, like a wheel turning.

11. Groups form in line again at rear, forward to front with curtsey
steps as at No. 5.

12. Repeat No. 6.

13. Groups form again, one-half being in each group, and form circles,
the wreaths hung on their arms while they join hands and skip in a circle.

14. Repeat Nos. 11 and 12.

15. Repeat Nos. 7 and 8. Put wreaths down at the back and take up baskets.

16. Couples down center to front.

17. Mates face each other. The two facing lines retreat to the sides,
skipping backward.

18. Lines skip to center, throwing “paper snow” from the baskets at each
other, then skip back to sides, throwing the paper continuously, so as
to keep the air full of the white snow. Repeat this advance and retreat
twice more. When the lines meet the third time the throwing ceases, the
couples march together down center to front, holding hands together high,
and carrying the empty baskets in the other hands.

March around the stage and off.




THE PICKANINNY’S CHRISTMAS.

_For Three Boys. More Can be Added at Pleasure._

_Directions at close._


_Tune: “Dixie’s Land.”_

    Oh, Chris’mas sho’ly am a-comin’,
    Don’ you hear the banjos tummin? (_Imitates banjo._)
    “Chris’mas gif’,” “Chris’mas gif’,” “Chris’mas gif’,”
            Dat’s de way.
    All de w’ite folks gib us cake an’ candy,
    Any ole ’ting what comes mos’ handy
    When we call “Chris’mas gif’,” “Chris’mas gif’,”
            On dis day.

    Oh, I’m glad ’tis merry Christmas,
            Ain’ I glad? Ain’ I glad?
    Oh, I’m glad ’tis Chris’mas, merry Chris’mas
    Wid its gif’s and holly berry,
            Ain’ I glad? Ain’ I glad?
    I’m glad ’tis merry Chris’mas!
            Ain’ I glad? Ain’ I glad?
    I’m glad ’tis merry Chris’mas.

    Oh, won’t we hab de shoat an’ possum
    Fixed up fine wid fruit and blossom.
    Chris’mas gif’, Chris’mas gif’, Chris’mas gif’,
            Dat’s de way.
    An’ de Chris’mas gif’s make a mighty showin’
    Sho’s you’re bawn, ef you’se only knowin’
    How to call “Chris’mas gif’,” “Chris’mas gif’,”
            Dat-a-way.

    CHORUS.
    Oh, I’m glad, etc.


DIRECTIONS.

If there are three who take part in this, one boy can sing the song and
the others join in the chorus, or all can sing the entire song together.
Let the one who sings the verses stand between the other two. If there
are more let the leader, who sings, stand before the others, who form
a straight line from right to left behind him. All face the audience.
During the stanzas they clap gently, keeping time as the leader sings.

At the chorus, while singing, they put their arms across each other’s
shoulders, the end ones with outer hands on hips, and take the following
steps:

1. Step three steps to the right, hop on right foot, and swing the left
foot before the right.

2. At accented measures (corresponding to “hurray, hurray”) stamp in time
first with left, then with right foot.

3. Three steps to left, hop on left foot and swing right foot before the
other.

4. Three steps to front (starting with right foot), hop on right foot,
swing left before the other.

5. Stamp in time, first with left foot, then with right, then hop on left
foot and swing the right in front of the left, then hop on right foot and
swing the left foot in front of the right.

6. Stamp with right foot, then with left; hop on left foot, swing right;
hop on right foot, swing left.

This completes the first stanza and chorus. Then, without singing, and in
time to the same tune, let the line behind, led by the leader in front,
give a dance. The motions are given below, but the time of them must be
found as the boys practice.

It is called a “dance,” but in reality is posturing and stepping.
Any other motions than those given can be used if desired, the only
requirement being that those in the line move in unison.

If the leader can do so, let him elaborate upon the motions, dance a clog
dance or a shuffle; or let him attitudinize in any absurd way. At the
close let him come to position, clapping in time as the second stanza is
sung, stepping as before at the chorus, and repeat the dance afterward.


DANCE.

1. All turn to right, the first boy with hands on hips, the others with
hands on the shoulders of the one in front. Hop on right foot, throw
left foot high, hop on left foot, throw right foot high. This takes four
measures and carries them four steps toward the left of the stage.

2. This starts at the words (or where they would be if sung) “Chris’mas
gif’,” etc. Each boy, with arms held at full length over head, and hands
clasped, whirls entirely around, once for each measure, ending with a
stamp of right foot on the last word and a quick wheel toward the right
of the stage.

3. Repeat Nos. 1 and 2 toward the right. It is now the chorus.

4. Front face, arms across shoulders; step obliquely to right one step
first beat, bend right knee second beat, with body and head bent to
right. Second step obliquely to left third beat, bend left knee fourth
beat, bend body and head to left. Alternate in this way until eight steps
are taken, when the next words would be “Ain’ I glad? Ain’ I glad?” (the
second time).

5. Each boy raises arms overhead, clasps his hands together and whirls
once for each “Ain’ I glad.” At the words “I’m glad ’tis merry Christmas”
he stamps with left foot, whirls as before at the next two repetitions of
“Ain’ I glad,” but does not stamp at the last line, only folds his arms
and bows, first to right, then to left.

CURTAIN.




POP-CORN DANCE.

_For Sixteen Little Girls._

_Dresses white, short and fluffy; white stockings and slippers. Capes and
caps of yellow cambric. The capes reach the bottom of the dresses and
have openings for the arms to pass through, and the caps are round skull
caps fitting the top of the head closely. The “dance” is a series of
simple steps and movements which are easily learned._

_Music: A march or two-step._


1. Enter at left rear in couples to a slow march, and for each step make
a turning motion of the body to right or left as the right or left foot
advances. March across the rear to right corner and turn diagonally and
sharply. March to left front and again turn and march across the front of
the stage. When the double line is in the center, halt, front face, and,
beginning with the leader nearest the audience, let one at a time, first
in the front, then in the rear line, give _one_ hop on the right foot,
then rest until this hop has been made by all.

2. (Music slightly quickened.) Lines step back with left foot a little
to the left, curtsey, rise, as the beats of the music indicate. Repeat,
with right foot toward the right, curtsey, rise and repeat these backward
movements until the rear of the stage is reached, both lines moving in
unison.

3. Advance to front of the stage with same motion, front line stepping to
right, and rear line to left simultaneously, thus giving a zig-zag motion.

4. Still holding hands the ends of the two lines move back until an
angle is formed, the joined hands of the lines as they are held forward,
forming the apex. The step for this motion is a hop, first with right,
then with left foot, bending the body almost at right angles to right or
left in the direction the step is taken.

5. Reverse the motion with steps forward until a straight line is again
formed.

6. Front line kneels on right knee, raises joined hands high on first
measure, lower them on second measure, repeat for four measures. Rear
line advances one step in such manner that the girls of rear line
alternate with those of front line, but behind them. Unclasp hands and
each make four hops, first on right, then on left foot, turning as she
does so. This completes a revolution. Then take one step to the right on
the first beat of the music, bend right knee (thus dipping or curtseying)
on the second beat, one step to the left on third beat, bend left knee on
fourth beat. This completes four measures.

7. Rear line kneels on right knee, but does not join hands until the
front line rises, unclasp hands and steps quickly backward between those
kneeling. This takes one measure. Then the kneeling line clasp hands as
at No. 6a, and those standing repeat No. 6b. Repeat this until each line
has knelt twice. This should bring them to the position they had before
Nos. 6 and 7, viz., in parallel rows facing the audience, only at the
rear of the stage instead of the front.

8. Both lines clasp hands. Rear line steps close to the front line and
puts the clasped hands over the heads, and in front of the front line.
This brings the girls alternating. The solid line thus formed runs
forward four steps (starting on left foot) in double time, viz., two
steps to each count. At the fifth step (which brings them on the left
foot) hop on the left foot, then on the right foot. Repeat these two
movements—the running forward and the hopping—until the front of the
stage is reached. It should take three, perhaps four, repetitions.

9. Both lines unclasp hands. Rear row steps back to its place behind the
front row as it was before No. 8, and each girl puts her hands over the
shoulders of the girl directly in front of her, who raises her hands to
clasp them. The four couples on the right now turn to the right (away
from the center) and those on the left face left. The two sets now move
away from each other with short steps and double time four steps forward
(always left foot first). The rear girl steps to the right of her partner
and they run four steps diagonally to the right. The rear girl then steps
behind her partner and they run four steps forward. The rear girl then
steps to the left of her partner and they run four steps diagonally to
the left. This figure is a little like that in the skate or barn dance.

10. The two sets now right-about-face and dance to the center as they
danced away from it, the front girl now being the rear one and dancing at
either side of her partner, etc.

11. When they meet at the center they face front, and all in unison dance
to the front as in No. 3, except that the forward movement is in the same
direction, and not zig-zag.

12. Repeat Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7.

13. Dance to the front of the stage with the couples holding hands as
in No. 10, but the figure is different. Let the couples run four short
steps diagonally to the left on the first two beats of a measure, then
hop first on the left foot, then on the right; then run diagonally to the
right four steps, hop twice, etc., repeating these movements until the
front of the stage is reached.

14. Retreat to rear with the same steps as in No. 13, only running
backward. Here throw off the cloaks. As they are buttoned only at the
neck, this can be done suddenly and all together. By throwing the capes
quite to the back of the stage as they stand they will be out of the way
of further movements. All the time they are doing this (which should
occupy not more than two measures, and one if possible) the hopping is
kept up. This is the popping of the corn, which thus comes out in its
fluffy white.

15. Dance to front again by the following steps: Four steps to left and
forward, hopping alternately on either foot, then four steps to right in
the same way; four steps to left, etc., and then, without losing step—

16. Retreat to rear, going backward with the same step. At the rear form
a line in front of the capes on the floor. During the last four numbers
the music has quickened until it is as fast as can possibly be kept time
with.

17. The instant this line is reached let the children step side by side
to form one continuous line, all holding hands. The two at the ends of
the line now put their free hand on their hips, and raise the hands
clasping their neighbors as high as they can. The next ones hold the
hands of the third numbers level with their shoulders, and tip their
heads toward the third ones. These third ones kneel on the right knee,
and have one hand up to hold the hands of the second ones, and the other
hand lower to hold the hands of the fourth in line, who kneel on both
knees as flat as possible.

The two in the middle of the line stand holding their joined hands as
high as possible, the others take positions as the second, third and
fourth in the lines have done. The result is a pop-corn chain in two
festoons.

If this is done instantly the effect is very pretty. The change from the
“popping” of the corn to the stillness of the festoons being unexpected
and striking. At the same time the music, which continues to the end, is
played softer and slower.

18. This pose is held for several measures. The music then gives the
signal by resuming a marching tempo, and playing louder; those kneeling
rise, and the whole line forms a circle, holding hands. The circle dances
around twice one way, then twice the other way, by running two steps,
hopping at the third step, and repeating.

19. The circle parts and swings back to a single line, where the festoon
is again formed, and held several measures.

CURTAIN.




THE SLEIGHBELL DRILL.

_For Twelve, or More, Boys, Ten to Twelve Years Old._

_Music: Any brisk march or two-step will be suitable. The music of
“Jingle Bells” or any similar piece in the same kind of time may be used._

_Costumes described at close._


The step for this is merely a trot, with short steps, and following
the leaders closely. The wands are to be shaken in time to the music
constantly, except where otherwise indicated.

1. Enter at opposite sides of rear, wands held in right hands at sides,
left hands on hips.

Cross stage toward each other, meet, turn and go to front, then
diagonally back to rear center. Fig. 1.

2. Leaders turn to right and left, across rear, down sides to front,
across front till they meet. Fig. 2.

3. All put left hands on shoulder of next one, the one at extreme left
keeps his hand on his hip. All step back diagonally with left foot one
step, bend left knee, and keep right knee straight. This makes the line
sink backward. At the same time extend right hand diagonally to right,
shaking wand in time to music. Hold two measures.

4. Left foot and right hand back to position; hold two measures.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1._ _Fig. 2._]

5. Step diagonally back one step with right foot—bend right knee—left
knee straight—right arm held directly overhead—wand shaken in time. Hold
two measures.

6. Back to position, as at No. 4.

[Illustration: _Fig. 3._]

7. Leaders turn toward rear—pass to rear—march diagonally to front at the
extreme right and left—back to rear at sides—across back to center—all
in the trot which is in double time. Fig. 3. In this figure, _and in
all of them_, let every boy, in following the leader, go to the precise
spot that the leader does before turning. Unless this rule is carefully
followed the outlines of the figures are lost, corners are missed, and
the whole drill becomes confused instead of effective.

8. Down center to front in single file, stepping into place alternately
from each side—halt.

They are now in one line, in the center, facing front. Beginning with
the foremost boy as No. 1, the odd numbers bend at right angles toward
the right, and stretch the wand out at the right, shaking it rapidly so
as to make a quivering sound with the bells. The even numbers take wands
in left hands, right hands on hips—bend to left—hold left arms at right
angles—and also quiver their wands. Hold two measures.

9. All erect—hands holding wands held up overhead—all quiver wands—hold
two measures. Execute these two movements, alternating, four times each.

10. Wands in right hands—left hands on hips. All to front, where they
separate, the leaders turning to their own sides, right or left, and
the others following. They turn backward close to the center line, and
march to the rear. Sides turn right or left, then back in a loop, to the
center, where they again form in a single line. Fig. 4.

11. This line, led by No. 1 (the foremost one as in No. 8), takes a line
like Fig. 5—all holding wands overhead and shaking them in time to the
music.

[Illustration: _Fig. 4._ _Fig. 5._]

12. When the front is reached the line separates, the leaders turning
to their own side, and the others following. March to sides—up side to
rear—across rear to center—where they meet, halt, front face.

13. The line now moves forward four steps—halts—and the boys, by couples,
strike each other’s wands twice; the first time one strikes and the other
parries, the second time reverse. Move four steps forward again, repeat
the striking, and so continue to the front. (The words “march” and “move”
have been used; but it must be kept in mind that unless other steps are
indicated all moving is done with the _trot_ before referred to.)

14. At front repeat Nos. 3, 4, 5, 6 twice.

15. Line separates, turning to sides—up sides to rear—across rear till
they meet at center, where they repeat Nos. 8, 9, 10 and 11. (Notice the
difference between “No. 3,” or 4, and “Fig. 3,” or 4.)

16. When leader is at front he turns toward rear, others following in a
single line, and they go in a circle, twice; the first time arms held at
right angles, shaking the wands in time to music; the second time around
the wands held overhead and quivered.

17. At completion of the second circle the line separates, each leader
leading his line to right or left as they reach the front—across front to
sides—up sides to rear, where they go out as they came in. As each boy
reaches the side where he turns to go toward the exit, he reaches his
wand out to the audience, gives one emphatic shake of the bell, then as
he turns away lets his hand fall to his side.


DIRECTIONS.

Costumes of red cambric; knickerbocker trousers, jacket belted at the
waist, and cut in points below the belt, each point having a small bell
on it; cap like toboggan cap with bell at the point. Let the boys go in
stocking feet, or with red cloth slippers. Stockings red. Each carries
a stick a foot long, and one-half the size of a broom handle. This is
covered with cloth like the suit, and has a bell at the tip.




PART II.

Dialogues, Exercises, Musical Pieces and Plays




ALL THE YEAR ’ROUND.

_For One Adult or Large Boy and One Small Boy._

_Santa Claus must be made to look very short and fat._


_BOY enters, sits down, leans elbow on table and his head on his hand._

BOY. Whatever shall I do? Christmas is almost here and not a single
thing finished. You see (_addressing audience_), when a fellow’s folks
have a small purse and a large family there’s no such thing as spending
money for us boys. (_Gets up, walks back and forth talking, with hands
in pockets._) All we earn goes for shoes, I guess. (_Stops and looks at
his own, then looks up laughing._) Anyhow, they wear out fast enough.
(_Resumes walk._) But I’m glad I’m big enough to work for my own
shoes. If I did nothing but play while father worked _for_ me I’d feel
worse than anything. (_To audience._) You know how that is. Besides,
I’m the oldest of the bunch and ought to be worth something. But you
know—(_stopping_) it does beat all how many things grown folks can find
for boys to do.

I go to school—of course—and I take a job whenever I can catch it out
of school hours, and I carry papers mornings, but that don’t take all
the time, and I thought I’d get a lot of things done for Christmas since
I can’t buy things. But do you s’pose I’ve done it? (_Sits down._) No,
sir-ee. Not a thing finished.

I was making a shoe box for father and I haven’t got any farther than
getting a box to work on, for I’ve had to milk the cow and feed the
chickens—and mend the gate—’cause father was away. Then I had a new
woodbox for mother—a jolly nice one—all trimmed with bars of wood and
stained; but, no, sir, mother, she needed me for ’bout a hundred and
’leven things, and work at it I couldn’t. And this boat for Bub (_shows
it_), not half done. And a bob-sled for little Sis—and a photograph frame
for Gramma—and—oh, pshaw. I’m just plum disappointed, and that’s the
truth. Not a gift done for anybody. (_Leans elbows on knees and chin on
hands._) If I was a girl I guess I’d cry. (_SANTA CLAUS walks in, lays
his hand on BOY’S shoulder. BOY jumps up as he looks around._) Jiminy!
You most scared me. (_Bows._) How de do?

SANTA CLAUS. Very well, thank you: and how do _you_ do? What’s the
trouble?

BOY. Excuse me; but how’d you know it was trouble? It isn’t a serious
trouble, you know; only boy trouble.

S. C. Boy troubles are hard to carry sometimes. What are yours?

BOY. Mostly, I guess, that I’ve not got my gifts done—and can’t finish
them now, ’cause there’s not time. And that means that there will be less
for the stockings, you know.

S. C. That _is_ hard lines. But why couldn’t you finish them?

BOY. Sit down, won’t you? (_They sit down._) Why—because—well, I had
to do lots of things. Kindling, you know, and bringing in wood for
mother—and taking care of the baby sometimes—and keeping little Bud out
of mischief—and sometimes—well, you see, I’m the oldest, and the others
are too little—sometimes I wash the dishes. Mother has so much to do, and
I ought to, don’t you think so?

S. C. Indeed, you ought, and I’m proud to find a boy who does it. But do
you know, son, _I_ think you are making a great mistake.

BOY (_looking alarmed_). Am I? What? I’m sorry.

S. C. You say you have nothing to give at Christmas. It strikes me that
you are giving a good many things, and very nice ones, too.

BOY (_bewildered_). I don’t understand.

S. C. No? (_Smiles, winks at audience._) What is Christmas for, anyhow?

BOY. _For?_ Why—it’s Christmas, Santa Claus’ birthday, you know. (_S. C.
nods._) And it’s for—for good will to men, I guess—and—

S. C. (_nods_). Right you are, son. And what do you give Christmas gifts
for?

BOY. Oh—because it’s fun; ’cause a fellow likes to make it nice for the
other folks and give ’em a good time, and—well, ’cause it’s fun.

S. C. Right you are again, son. See here, now. Didn’t you milk the cow
for father and all such things while he was away?

BOY. Yes—’course.

S. C. And didn’t it make him feel comfortable to know that things were
going right while he was gone?

BOY. Guess so. Sure.

S. C. More comfortable than to have a shoe box?

BOY (_slowly_). Per—haps—yes.

S. C. And you got kindling, and took care of the baby, and washed dishes
for mother?

BOY. ’Course.

S. C. And didn’t that make it easier for her than if she had a pretty
woodbox?

BOY (_slowly_). I guess so. Yes—sure.

S. C. And doesn’t little Sis enjoy having long rides on your sled better
than to have a sled of her own to go alone on?

BOY. I’m not so sure about that.

S. C. _I_ am. And didn’t little Bob like the snow man it took you so long
to make for him better than the little boat? And didn’t dear old Grandma
care more for the yarn you wound, and the needles you picked up, and the
fires you built, and the errands you did, and—

BOY (_squirming_). Aw. Hold on. Those are such little things.

S. C. True enough, and each of them took some of your time, and kept you
from making the photograph frame; and each of them made her lonely day a
little easier, didn’t it?

BOY. Well, I should hope so. Say. I think it must be awful when you can’t
run and holler and have fun—and—I guess some day _I’ll_ be old like that.
(_Shrugs shoulders._) Gee! (_Whistles softly._)

S. C. (_rises, puts arm across BOY’S shoulder_). Don’t you begin to see,
my son, what I mean?

BOY (_looks at him a minute_). That little things strung along are better
to make folks happy than a bigger thing for a gift at Christmas?

S. C. (_slaps BOY on the back, grabs his hands and shakes them vigorously
while he laughs. BOY rises._) That is it, to a tee. And do you begin to
see any farther?

BOY (_looks at S. C. in silence a minute_). Perhaps you mean—do you
mean—that to live that way—doing little things all the time—would be like
Christmas? (_Excitedly._) Jiminy Christmas! I see! I see! Why! I can keep
Christmas going the whole year ’round that way!

S. C. That is the only Santa Claus worth while, and the only Christmas
that can ever be real, for it is the Christmas spirit of love and
kindness. (_BOY whirls around, tosses up his cap. S. C. exit._)

BOY. Christmas and Santa Claus all in one. And every day in the year.
Say—(_turns suddenly and S. C. is gone_). Why—where—(_looks all around,
then says slowly_) well, I’ll be—isn’t that the queerest thing?
(_Puts hands in pockets._) But I see it just the same. (_Musingly._)
“The Christmas spirit of love and kindness.” “The only Santa Claus
worth while.” Christmas every day in the year. (_Shouts._) Hooray for
Christmas. I’m going to tell mother. (_Exit._)




A BOY’S CHRISTMAS.

_For Three Boys of Ten or Twelve Years._


_Two sit whittling, one working on the edge of a small wooden box, the
other at the edges of a piece of wood about one inch thick by a foot
square. The third has an oblong box partly together and is sawing the
other piece or whittling the edges as they talk._

FRANK—

    Christmas is coming—it’s awfully slow—
    What do you think you will get? Say, Joe.

JOE—

    I don’t know, Frank, and I don’t much care
    If only I get some good skates—so there!

TOM—

    That isn’t what bothers me most, you see,
    I always get lots on the Christmas tree,
    But what shall I _give_? That’s the hardest part.

JOE—

    I’m making my little kid brother a cart.

                                                         (_Holds it up._)

    But somehow this wood won’t saw a bit straight,
    And it splits where I nail it. That’s what I hate.

FRANK—

    Right you are there, Joe. See what I’ve made?
    My knife’s pretty dull, so I broke the best blade.

TOM—

    What do you call it?

FRANK—

    A box, at the start,
    For sister’s best ribbons; but it would come apart
    Till I put some big nails in. They broke it in two,
    And I had to stick it together with glue;
    And now it don’t look so awfully well.

                                               (_Looks at it dolefully._)

JOE—

    Put pictures all over it, then you can’t tell
    It ever was broken. That’s what _I_ would do.
    But say! How it bothers when one works with glue.
    Now this! (_Holds it up._) It has stuck everywhere that it could
    Except where I wanted to make it real good.

TOM—

    That’s just what’s the trouble. It’s this way with me.
    I work hard, and make things as nice as can be,
    But somehow, they never seem quite the right way
    To give for a present on Christmas-tree day.

JOE (_exclaims suddenly_)—

    I know!

FRANK—

    Well, what is it?

TOM—

    Out with it, then, Joe.

JOE—

    We like to make gifts like the others, you know,

                                               (_They nod in agreement._)

    But something or other most always goes wrong.

FRANK—

    I know how it is.

TOM—

    Yes, you’ve put it quite strong.
    But Mother can understand things at first sight,
    And _she_ will say “thank you,” and call it all right.
    I’ll give this to _Mother_. She’s just the right one!
    She’ll like it and use it, because I’m her son.

FRANK—

    Say, Joe, you’re a trump to think up a nice way
    For us to give presents on Christmas-tree day.
    My box goes to Mother—she knows about glue,
    And she’ll fix it up till for something ’twill do.

TOM—

    This board I have whittled all smooth, and ’twill make
    A board to cut on for bread or for cake.
    I’ll give it to Mother, and she’s sure to say
    “Thank you, Tom; you make nice gifts for Christmas-tree day.”




A CHRISTMAS BARGAIN.

_For Two Characters, MOTHER and CHILD._

_Stage setting: The furnishings of a modern room. Costumes modern and
simple._


MOTHER (_draws CHILD to her side, kisses her, CHILD stands with MOTHER’S
arm around her_). It is almost Christmas time, little girl. What would
you like to have Santa Claus bring you?

CHILD. I only want one thing, mother dear, and Santa Claus can’t give me
that, nor anyone else.

MOTHER. Are you very sure, dear? Santa Claus can do wonderful things, you
know.

CHILD. I’m very sure, motherkin. And if I can’t have that, I don’t care
about Christmas.

MOTHER. Why, my little Mary? Tell me about it, dear. Possibly I can
arrange it, for I want to have you happy more than anything else in the
world, especially at Christmas time. Tell me.

CHILD. You won’t laugh at me?

MOTHER. No, dear; I won’t even think a laugh.

CHILD. Well, then, I want to be grown-up and have you a little girl.

MOTHER. Why, Mary, Mary!

CHILD. Now you are laughing at me.

MOTHER. My _dear_! I’m just as sober as I can be.

CHILD (_pouting_). Your eyes laugh, anyhow.

MOTHER (_takes CHILD by the shoulders and holds the CHILD in front of her
at arm’s length_). Look in my face, Mary; straight in my eyes, and tell
me why you want such a strange thing.

CHILD (_hesitatingly_). I—don’t—just like to, mamma. You might not like
it.

MOTHER. I shall like it if you tell me the true reason, dear.

CHILD. And you won’t cry?

MOTHER. Not a tear.

CHILD (_slowly_). It’s because I’m so tired of being told I can’t do
things, and of having to do things I don’t like. Oh, mamma! You don’t
know how tired I am of being somebody else. I want to be _just me_.

MOTHER (_drawing CHILD to her side again_). Are you some other mamma’s
little girl?

CHILD. Not another mamma’s little girl, but I can’t be the me I want to
be. The me inside of me wants to be a very different me indeed.

MOTHER (_They sit silent a moment_). Would you like to try it just for
one day?

CHILD (_standing up suddenly_) Mamma, dear! What do you mean?

MOTHER. I mean this, Mary. Suppose that just for one day we pretend that
you are mamma, and I am Mary. I shall have to say that we must both stay
at home, just us two. If there were more time I wouldn’t say even that.
But if you’ll agree to that we’ll try.

CHILD (_eagerly_). To do just as I want to?

MOTHER. Yes, dear.

CHILD. And you will do what I tell you?

MOTHER. If I possibly can.

CHILD (_jumps up and down_). Oh, goody, goody! And I can have what I want
for dinner? And wear the dress I want? And I needn’t go to school? Nor
practice? And I can sit up as late as I want to? Really?

MOTHER. All of that.

CHILD. All right. When will we begin?

MOTHER. Right now, if you like. It’s morning, and it isn’t school time
yet. But I’d like to ask one question. Is this to be the Christmas
present you want more than anything? And are there to be no other gifts?

CHILD. Why, mamma, if I could be really the mamma, and not just pretend,
and if it could be all the time, and not just one day, I wouldn’t want
another single thing. I truly wouldn’t. But I think—I wish—I could have a
few other things, little ones.

MOTHER. Very well, then. You are mamma now, and I am Mary.

CHILD. First thing, then, I’ll have chicken for lunch and cream puffs.
(_Goes toward the door._) And some of that raspberry jam—and—coffee.
(_Turns to MOTHER._) _Yes_, I’m going to have _coffee_. _You_ can’t have
any, Mary. It isn’t good for little girls. But _I_ can have it. Mammas
always do. (_Turns to door again._)

MOTHER. Are you going to cook them, mamma?

CHILD. No; ’course not. Bridget’ll cook ’em. (_Turns suddenly to
MOTHER._) Oh, mamma! Will you tell Bridget to mind me? ’Cause she don’t
know I’m mamma, you know.

MOTHER. Very well. I’ll do it now. (_Goes out._)

CHILD. And hurry back, please, ’cause I want you to be Mary.

CURTAIN.


SCENE II—_MOTHER sewing. CHILD comes in dressed fancifully._

CHILD. Mary, have you finished that hemming? ’Cause I want you to
practice.

MOTHER. Not quite, mamma. But can I play when this is done?

CHILD (_severely_). No, Mary, you can’t. You’ve played enough; and if you
don’t go to school, why, you’ve got to study at home—just lots. (_Sits
down, adjusts dress, folds hands._) You’ve got to do lots of sums, and
most fifty words in spelling. And you’ve got to practice—two—hours. Just
scales and finger exercises, _nothing_ else. (_Apologetically, aside._)
I’m not doing this to be mean, mamma, I truly ain’t. But I want you to
see how it feels to _have_ to do things you don’t like. (_Continues with
dignity._) You see Mary, mothers know lots more than little girls. I mean
they _think_ they do—and _I_ know you must do that way.

MOTHER. But I’m hungry, and it’s long past lunch time.

CHILD. I know it, Mary, but you finish that before you can have any
lunch. (_In a little girl’s tone._) Really and truly Bridget is horrid.
She said it would take her too long to fix all the things I told her to,
and when I in-sis-ted—I had to stamp my foot at her—she just said all
right, but I’d have to wait for ’em then. Does she do that way when you
are the mamma?

MOTHER. She is rather trying sometimes.

CHILD. Mercy! I should think so! (_Resumes grown-up air._) Now,
after lunch—when it comes—if it ever does—I’m going to play _all_
the afternoon. Oh! I forgot. Don’t mothers ever play? Don’t you play
sometimes, when you are the mamma?

MOTHER. Oh, yes.

CHILD. But how?

MOTHER. I read (_CHILD makes a face_) or do fancy work.

CHILD. I hate sewing.

MOTHER. Or I have a friend to lunch.

CHILD. Yes, but you only sit and talk.

MOTHER. Or I write letters.

CHILD. That’s worse than sewing.

MOTHER. Or I play the piano. Oh, I enjoy myself very much.

CHILD. Well, I don’t think mammas have a bit good time if that is
all they do. (_Jumps up, skips across the floor._) Oh, I know!
(_Stops, sits down in another chair, is dignified again._) I forgot.
(_Apologetically._) You see, I’ve been Mary so long. Well, Mary, you go
and bring me my jewelry. (_MOTHER hesitates._) Go right along, child.
You must obey me at once. (_MOTHER goes out, CHILD smiles._) I guess she
finds that isn’t very easy. (_Bounces up and down on her chair._) My! But
it’s horrid to sit still so long! I’d like to go swing, only mammas never
do. (_Squirms about. MOTHER enters, hands her two jewel boxes._)

MOTHER. Shall I practice now?

CHILD. No; do your sums. All those on the four pages I showed you—_all_
of them. (_Opens boxes._) Now I’m going to put all of these on—all the
rings and all the bracelets. (_Tries them on._)

CURTAIN.


SCENE III—_Evening. MOTHER reading, CHILD sitting upright and nodding,
trying to keep awake. After three or four hard nods she yawns and says_:

CHILD. Mary, it’s time you went to bed. I’d have sent you long ago, only
papa was away and I was lone—I mean—I missed him.

MOTHER. Shall I go to bed now?

CHILD. No. My head aches.

MOTHER. Shall I smooth it? Little girls can’t help much when folks don’t
feel well, can they?

CHILD (_snappishly_). Don’t talk like that to me. I’m feeling real
mizzable. (_Sighs, leans back in chair._) Read to me. Quick.

MOTHER. What shall I read?

CHILD. Oh, for goodness sake! You ask foolish questions. Read what mammas
like, of course.

MOTHER. Not Cinderella?—nor the Fairy Prince—or—

CHILD (_wistfully_). If I was Mary I would say, “Yes.” But I’m mamma.
(_Then suddenly runs to her mother and leans against her._) Oh, I don’t
want to be Mother any more. It’s hard and tiresome. I want you to cuddle
me—my head aches—and I haven’t played all—day—lo—o—ng. And Bridget
has been horrid—and I never want to taste cream puffs again—nor fruit
cake—nor lots of sugar in my tea. Bridget said I ate enough of ’em to
sink a ship. And I feel awful here. (_Hand on stomach._) Oh, mamma,
mamma! (_MOTHER holds her close and kisses her._) And, mamma, it’s
almost Christmas, and I promised to take this for a present. And it’s
all—just—wasted! Oh, dear me!

MOTHER. Little Mary, listen to me. Some day you will be as happy to be a
really mother, I hope, as I am; but just now you are a little girl, and I
don’t want you to be anything else.

CHILD. I don’t want to any more.

MOTHER. And _I_ think the nicest present you can have will be to forget
all about yourself, and have a lovely, happy time with some other
children. Shall we ask Santa Claus for that?

CHILD. Yes, oh yes! But, mamma, I know there isn’t any really Santa
Claus, but I like to think there is.

MOTHER. So do I, dear. There really is a Santa Claus spirit, though,
which every one can have.

CHILD. Sing to me, mamma. Christmas wouldn’t be Christmas without it.

MOTHER (_taking CHILD in her lap_). You are rather a big little girl to
be rocked, but I’ll try it. (_Sings Christmas carol._)

CURTAIN.


In the foregoing it is well to have the one personating “Mother” a large
woman in order to make as much contrast as possible between her and
“Mary.” As Mary has a good many lines to learn, her part must be taken by
one not too young; but with proper dressing the effect of a little girl
can be attained. If Mary is too large to be held in the lap in the last
scene, let her sit on a footstool and lay her head on Mother’s lap.




THE FIRST CHRISTMAS.

_For One Adult or Large Girl and One Child as Small as Can Learn the
Part._

_This may be presented wholly without accessories, except a chair and a
small table and work basket, or made to picture a Puritan home._

_The effect of this simple thing lies in the spirit put into it by the
actors. Well done it is exceedingly effective._

_Costumes and directions at the close._


CHILD (_enters, goes to MOTHER, who sits sewing—leans against her knee_)—

    Mother, I heard the children say
    That Christmas will be here tomorrow.
    I never heard of that before,
    Is it a time of joy or sorrow?

    Did you keep Christmas years far back
    In your old home across the water?

MOTHER—

    Yes, child, with gifts and great yule logs.
    But that was long ago, my daughter.

CHILD—

    Tell me about it, mother dear,
    Why did you have such Christmas gladness?
    And did you give to all you loved?
    Did you help all who lived in sadness?

MOTHER—

    Dear child, this is the time of year
    The dear Lord’s birth is celebrated.
    But heathen rites and wicked mirth
    Have marked for theirs all things created.
    And so ’tis wrong for us to join
    In ceremonies so unfitting.

                              (_Puts down her work, takes CHILD’S hand._)

    But come. The storm is fierce without,
    And glistening snow is downward flitting.

                                                               (_Rises._)

    To bed, oh little daughter mine.
    The pines and winds their songs are singing,
    And all the stars—and Lady Moon—
    Their watchful care to you are bringing.

               (_MOTHER starts to go out, CHILD steps in front of her and
                                                looks up into her face._)

CHILD—

    But, Mother dear, on my birthday
    You give me gifts, and I am merry.
    Why is it wrong on Christ’s birthday
    For us to help make others cheery?

MOTHER—

    To bed, my little daughter mine,
    Nor vex your childish heart with fretting.

                                 (_Starts to go, CHILD again stops her._)

CHILD—

    But, Mother, _you_ had Christmas time,
    You told me so; you’re not forgetting?

MOTHER—

    Nay, child, I don’t forget.

CHILD—

                                Then why
    Can it be wrong if _you_ could do it?
    You are so good. It made _you_ glad.

MOTHER—

    But I have learned to sadly rue it.

CHILD—

    But tell me why. I cannot see
    Why joy displeases the good Father.
    For when we’re glad we want to share,
    And make all others glad together.

MOTHER (_moves toward the door_)—

    ’Tis time my little maid should go
    And on her pillow white be sleeping;
    While God shall guard through all the night.
    And winter stars their watch be keeping.

                                                         (_They go out._)

MOTHER (_returns alone, clasps hands as she says_:)

    My little maid! _Can_ it be wrong
    To give her Christmas joy, I wonder?

            (_Thinks, gets work basket, sits down, fashions a rough doll,
             previously prepared, from bits of cloth. She puts on a dress
              of gray, like her own—it can be tied and pinned together by
               previous practice—with apron and kerchief. This is done as
             she talks, with occasional pauses, finishing it silently and
                                                 holding it up to view._)

    Was it all wrong—that happy mirth—
    In the old home in England yonder?

    Her childish questions reach my heart.
    God loves to have us glad, most surely;
    And loving Him, our love for all
    Must stronger be, and grow more purely.

             (_Goes out holding up the doll for her own admiration. After
              short interval returns without the doll, goes to window and
                                            looks out, speaking slowly._)

    And now ’tis dawn; the night is gone,—
    And it is holy Christmas morning.
    Snow-drifts and ice and glittering stars
    Are miracles for its adorning.

              (_A pause. CHILD runs in joyously, hugging the doll. As she
          talks she clasps her MOTHER and shows all possible joy, dancing
                                                      up and down, etc._)

CHILD—

    Oh mother dear! Oh mother dear!
    See what I found beside me sleeping!
    If God kept watch He knew it came,
    And knows how Christmas we are keeping.

    If you love _me_ so much, and love
    To give me gifts like this, dear mother,
    How very loving God must be!
    He must love more than any other!

MOTHER (_takes CHILD’S hand and puts her arm around her_)—

    Dear little maiden mine! Your faith
    That best of lessons holy,
    That loving God is loving _all_;
    And Love is Help to high and lowly.

CURTAIN.


COSTUMES.

Both dress alike. Dress gray, plain waist and close sleeves, skirt to
ankles. White apron, white kerchief crossed over the shoulders, plain
muslin caps, not tied under the chin, white stockings, low shoes.

The mother is very gentle and loving, the child eager and impetuous. This
can be made very “taking” by having both the characters children; the
smaller the better.




THE KING OF THE YEAR.

_For Seventeen or More Characters._

_This can be carried out with children entirely or with part adults._


CHARACTERS.

    NEW YEAR.
    SAINT VALENTINE.
    SAINT PATRICK.
    EASTER.
    MAY and JUNE.

    _Boys._
    APRIL FOOL.
    FOURTH OF JULY.
    VACATION TWIN.

    _Girls._
    HALLOWE’EN.
    THANKSGIVING.
    VACATION TWIN.

    SANTA CLAUS, _the King_.

_No stage setting required except throne for the KING._


GREETING SONG.

_Tune: “A-Roving.”_

CHILDREN (_enter, curtsey to audience. Sing._)—

    We’ve gathered here, kind friends so dear,
    To choose ourselves a King;
    And when we find the nicest kind
    We’ll clap our hands and gayly sing,
        A welcome to our king
        We will gayly sing.

CHORUS.

    Oh, glad will the day be when
    We have a king who joy will bring!
    We’ll give a joyous welcome
        To our king.

(_NEW YEAR enters, bows to children. They curtsey to him. He sings._)

_Tune: “Kingdom Comin’.”_

    My little friends, I bring you greetings
      For a happy New Year’s Day.
    I’m the holiday of hope and rejoicing,
      And I drive dull care away.
    You all enjoy the rosy pictures
      Of the future that I bring,
    And you like to make my good resolutions,
      So you’d better crown me king!

CHILDREN (_singing chorus_).

    The New Year comes, ho, ho! We hate to see it go;
    For we like to make good resolutions
      Which we never keep, you know!

(_NEW YEAR steps to one side. VALENTINE enters, salutes the children
first, then the audience._)

_Tune: “She’s Gone; Let Her Go.”_

VALENTINE—

    I’m the patron saint of the children,
    But I care for all true hearts as well.
    Be they sixteen or sixty I love them all,
    And they long for my magic spell.

    Dear Cupid’s my merry attendant.
    He obeys me where’er he may be.
    You may roam this wide world over,
    But you’ll never find a friend like me.

CHILDREN—

    Valentine is a good saint, we love him;
    Cupid dear is a very good friend,
    With his kisses and darts, and his loving hearts,
    There are thrills for us without end.

(_VALENTINE retires. SAINT PATRICK enters, salutes, and sings._)

_Tune: “Mush, Mush.”_

SAINT PATRICK—

    Oh, me darlin’s, I’ve come to remind ye
    That ’tis I’m the best fri’nd can be found.
    Where’s the toime for sich rollickin’ fun now
    As ye’ll get when my day comes ’round?

ALL (_join_)—

    For ’tis mush, mush, mush tu—ral—i—ad—dy,
    Sing mush, mush, mush tu—ral—i—ay,

(_PAT. dances, all keep time._)

    There’s ne’er a gossoon in the village
    But welcomes Saint Patrick’s fine day.

SAINT PATRICK—

    So children dear, don’t ye forget me,
    I’ve hearts of all kinds for yer choice,
    Take yer pick,—but don’t fail to remember
    An’ shout fer me wid yer swate voice.

ALL—

    For ’tis mush, etc.

(_PAT. dances, etc._)

(_SAINT PATRICK retires, EASTER enters, salutes, etc._)

_Tune: “Upidee.”_

EASTER—

    I come to bring you Easter morn,
        Easter morn, Easter morn,
    It tells the winter’s cold has gone
        Happy Easter morn,
    The day when come the flowers of spring,
    The day when all the sweet birds sing.

ALL—

    Happy Easter day is here,
        Happy day, happy day!
    For winter’s death has gone away,
        Blessed Easter day.

(_APRIL FOOL dances in, sings joyously, attitudinizing._)

APRIL FOOL—

    I come to banish solemn thought,
        April fool! April fool!
    You’re free for jokes—but don’t get caught,
        Jolly April fool!

(_Points to EASTER._)

    She’s all right, sure, but follow me,
    And fun and frolic you shall see.

(_Music, but no singing. APRIL prances and dances, CHILDREN wave hands in
time, others move heads in time. At close APRIL bows himself back into a
place with the other holidays. MAY and JUNE enter._)

_Tune: “Noah’s Ark.”_

MAY and JUNE—

    Oh children dear, see here, see here,
    We’ve come with beautiful flowers.
    The winter gray has gone away,
    And we’re not afraid of the showers.

MAY—

    May time posies
    Are all for you to be picking;

JUNE—

    June time roses
    Are yours, you may gather them all.

MAY—

    The grass is green, come choose your queen,
    Here’s crown and scepter of flowers;

JUNE—

    On bush and vine my blossoms twine,
    And sweeten the sunny hours.

      CHORUS.
      May time posies, etc.

CHILDREN—

    The flowers have come, the blessed flowers,
    With joy our voices are ringing.
    For May-time posies, June-time roses,
    Give we thanks as we sing.
        May-time posies
    Are all for us to be picking!
        And June-time roses
    Are ours, we may gather them all!

(_MAY and JUNE retire, July enters, keeping time with a slight tap of
his drum until he reaches his place, and very lightly through the first
verse, then louder at the chorus._)

_Tune: “Rumsty Ho!”_

JULY—

    The firecrackers pop, and the guns go bang!
      Hip hurrah! Hip hurrah!
    The cannons go “boom!” and the gay bells cling-clang!
    And the boys shout the message “Fourth of July!”
        Hip—a—yi! Fourth July!

    This day is jolliest of them all.
        Hip hurrah! Hip hurrah!
    The crackers are popping, and drums do call,
    And the flags are a-flying on house and hall,
        Hip—a—yi! Fourth July!

(_CHILDREN join. JULY marches, taps drum, all keep time, softly patting
hands, strike hands at second syllable of “Hurrah, hurrah!” and again at
last syllable of hip—a—yi and July._)

    The drummer boys drum, the band calls sweet,

ALL—

          Hip hurrah! Hip hurrah!

JULY—

    The soldiers are marching along the street,
    And you have to keep time with your hands and feet.

ALL—

          Hip—a—yi! Fourth July!

(_JULY retires, VACATION TWINS enter._)

_Tune: “McSorley’s Twins.”_

VACATION TWINS—

    Oh, we are Vacation, and we are the twins,
    Who are worth all the rest of the year.
    No school times for us, but we play all day long,
    And nothing but fun you can hear.
    And ’tis camping and riding and fishing we go,
    With tramping o’er mountains and lea,
    Will you tell us if ever a king there could be
    Who would rule you so kindly as we?

    CHORUS.

CHILDREN—

    Yes, we know you, Vacation, we know you so well
    You will be a delight, that is clear,
    Such elegant times you give us, yes we know
    You’re the best of them all in the year.

(_Repeat the chorus._)

(_HALLOWE’EN hurries in._)

_Tune: “Mary Had a Little Lamb.”_

HALLOWE’EN—

    Wait a little, children dear,
        Wait and hear! Wait and hear!
    You’ve forgotten something near,
        Listen, you shall hear.

(_Slower and with much emphasis on each word._)

    In autumn time there comes a night
        Full of fright—a ghostly night,
    When you see full many a sight,
        Many a sound shall hear

(_She continues, using the college chorus._)

    Here the witches call! A—a—a—ah!

(_Sung slowly with a wail._)

(_Stage whisper._)

    Oh aren’t you glad to hear such a call as that?
      Hearts going pit—a—pat, hair rising ’neath your hat,
      Oh, aren’t you glad at the call of the witches’ cat
          At old Hallowe’en?

(_Quicker._)

    Wait a little, children dear,
        Wait and hear! Wait and hear!
    You’ve forgotten something near,
        Something you shall hear.

(_Slower, with earnestness, marks signs in the air._)

    Magic tokens then appear,
        Spells are wrought, sounds you hear,

(_Slower._)

    Fortunes told for all the year,

(_Very slow and soft._)

    Told you soft and clear.

ALL (_very loud_)—

    Hear the witches call! A—a—a—ah!

(_Repeat, with hands over ears, then a third time very softly._)

    CHORUS.

ALL—

(_Remove hands from ears, reach out both hands to HALLOWE’EN._)

    Yes, we are glad (_hands clasped over head, eyes staring_) to hear
      such a call as that,

(_Softer._)

    Hearts going pit—a—pat, at such a call as that,
    Yes, we are glad (_pause, count five_) to hear such a call as that

(_Silence, all listen with hand at ear, count ten slowly, then loudly._)

    At old Hallowe’en.

(_THANKSGIVING sings behind scenes, all start, listen, and as she enters,
as indicated, all smile and CHILDREN take hold of hands._)

_Tune: “Auld Lang Syne.”_

    Should auld acquaintance be forgot
      And never brought to mind?
    Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
      And days of auld lang syne?

(_Enters slowly._)

        For auld lang syne, my dear,
          For auld lang syne,
        We’ll tak’ a cup o’ kindness yet,
          For auld lang syne.

    For all the blessings sent to us,
      For all the love that’s given,
    For country dear, for home, for friends,
      We thank thee, God in heaven.
    Thanksgiving gives us sweetest cheer,
      It turns our thoughts above.
    For all the blessings of the year,
      We thank thee, God above.

(_Second verse repeated by all. Raise faces and fold hands during the
last lines. THANKSGIVING retires._)

(_SANTA CLAUS, behind scenes._)

_Tune: “Oh, Dem Golden Slippers.”_

SANTA CLAUS—

    I am coming near, I am almost here,

(_All listen._)

    I am bringing you merriment and joyous cheer,

(_Enters. As he sings CHILDREN show various degrees of delight._)

    Happy hearts and faces that smile, and smile,
    I am bringing to you children, as I come.

(_Winks, nods, shows full stockings and bundles in his pack._)

    And the varied fruits of the Christmas tree,
    And the overflowing stockings you soon shall see;
    And the bundles queer, and surprises dear,
    I am bringing to you, children, as I come.

CHILDREN—

(_Clap hands at “merry” wherever it comes in the chorus, surround SANTA
CLAUS, taking his hands, etc._)

    Oh, ’tis merry Christmas! Oh, ’tis merry Christmas!
    Merry Christmas that we love best of all the whole round year!
    Oh, ’tis merry Christmas! Oh, ’tis merry Christmas!
    Merry Christmas who’ll be our king!
    He’s best of all the year!

(_Repeat chorus, they all surround SANTA CLAUS, taking him with them
as they march around the stage, half the children on either side. If
necessary, sing the chorus a second time to prolong the march. They end
by leading SANTA CLAUS to the throne and placing him upon it, and as the
children sing the next verse they crown him. The holidays stand half on
either side._)

CHILDREN—

    There’s no other one under all the sun
    Brings us such gay hearts and such cheery fun.
    So we crown him king, and we love to sing
    How we love him, as we crown him our king.

(_HOLIDAYS join._)

    CHORUS.
    Oh, ’tis merry Christmas, etc.

ALL (_sing_)—

    Oh, our hearts grow tender when he comes ’round,
    And we try to make happiness for all abound;
    For his love for us makes us love you all,
    So we love him, and we crown him for our king.

    CHORUS.
    Oh, ’tis merry Christmas, etc.

CURTAIN.


DIRECTIONS.

As they sing each holiday comes forward in turn and offers Santa Claus an
emblem, which he hands to the children, and which they fasten—with pins
or otherwise—to the high back of the throne, or to the curtain behind
him, except the basket of flowers which May brings, and the roses from
June. The basket is placed at his feet, and the wreath on the arm of the
chair which forms his throne. The horn of plenty is also placed at his
feet.

Each makes a low bow as he presents his offering.

New Year offers a large card.

St. Valentine a huge valentine.

St. Patrick a big green shamrock, cut from green cardboard.

Easter a stalk of lilies.

April his cap and bells which he takes off for the purpose.

May-day her basket.

June her wreath of roses.

July a flag.

Vacation Twins a tennis racket and a butterfly net.

Hallowe’en a witch riding on a broom, cut from black cardboard.

Thanksgiving a horn of plenty, full of grain and fruit.

Each bows, gives offering and retires to place.


DIRECTIONS.

No stage setting is absolutely needful for this little play except the
throne for the king, but if there can be a small platform on either
side of the throne large enough to accommodate the children, or those
personating them, having the holidays on the level, it will give a better
effect. The throne can be merely a large upholstered chair, or it may be
draped and surrounded with curtains and a canopy overhead.


COSTUMES.

NEW YEAR should be quite a small boy (if children take the parts) in full
dress suit. This is not difficult to make and may be of cambric. If an
adult takes the part, the costume may be the same, or the traditional
figure of Father Time may be followed.

SAINT VALENTINE—Shakesperian costume, tights, trunks, cloak, etc. Carries
a mandolin.

SAINT PATRICK—Knee breeches and long frock coat of gray, battered “plug”
hat, green vest and stockings, low shoes with buckles.

EASTER—Long white dress with gold cord and tassel around the waist, gold
band around the head, hair hanging loosely. Carries a stalk of lilies.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1._]

APRIL FOOL—Jester’s suit (can be of cambric), black tights and trunks,
jacket reaching half way to knees and belted in, bottom of jacket, and
the wide collar cut in long points and trimmed with orange, with tiny
bells on points. Hood close fitting to head (see Fig. 1), with three
curved horns turning forward. These horns are stuffed with hair. The
collar is fastened to the hood, not to the jacket.

MAY and JUNE—Two little girls. White or light dresses trimmed with
flowers, wreaths on head. May’s flowers are delicate spring flowers,
those of June are roses, and she carries a wreath of them.

FOURTH OF JULY—Boy with drum hung before him, firecrackers around his
neck, carries a flag over his shoulder, drumstick in right hand.

VACATION TWINS—Sailor or khaki suits; one carries a butterfly net, the
other a tennis racket.

HALLOWE’EN—Long black gown, white cloth over the head, hanging evenly all
around the shoulders, places cut for eyes. Carries witch riding on broom
cut from black cardboard.

THANKSGIVING—Puritan costume; or it may be brown, flowing robe trimmed
with autumn leaves. Carries a horn of plenty, full of grain (in the grass
form) and fruit. This with either costume.

SANTA CLAUS—The traditional dress.




MRS. RANDY’S CHRISTMAS.

_A Christmas Play in One Scene._


_Eight Characters; Three Adults, Two Little Boys and Three Little Girls._

    MRS. RANDY                 _The Mother_
    MRS. VAN DUSEN ⎫             _Visitors_
    MRS. GRAHAM    ⎭
    MARY    ⎫
    SUSIE   ⎪
    ANNIE   ⎬          _Mrs. R.’s Children_
    TEDDY   ⎪
    JOHNNIE ⎭

_Stage setting: A bare room with one pine table and two chairs. MRS.
R. is seated by the table darning stockings. Her work basket is on the
table._

MRS. RANDY. Dear me! How late it’s a-gettin’. I just have _got_ to finish
this mendin’ before the children get home, ’cause they’ll distract me so
I don’t know what I’m doin’.

This is the first day I’ve had at home in goodness knows when, ’ceptin’
Sundays, of course, and there’s enough needs doin’ here to keep a dozen
busy.

Now let’s see. Tomorrow’s Christmas, and I ain’t got nothin’ to speak of
ready for the children. I thought I’d ’a been able to save just a little
by now; but that winder Teddy broke took all I’d laid by to pay for it;
and the spankin’ he got didn’t pay it back neither.

So here I be, stockin’s most mended, but just about nothin’ to put in
’em. There’s those red apples Mrs. Jones gave me yesterday, and there’s
that pair of white kid gloves I’ve been savin’ for most two years. I was
goin’ to wait till Mary got a little bigger ’fore I gave ’em to her, but
I guess she’ll have to be big enough now. She’ll be real proud to have a
pair of white kid gloves, like what real ladies wear. I know these are
genooine, for the lady what wore ’em gave ’em to me. Then I was plannin’
to buy a fine silk tie for Teddy, but now I can’t, so I’ll just see what
I can do with that old one that used to be his father’s.

But there isn’t anything for the little ones, and now I can’t buy ’em
anything. I must do something, but I surely don’t know what.

TEDDY (_rushing in excitedly_). Ma! Just look! There’s a fine motor car
stopped out in the street.

MARY (_following_). And Ma! See! A fine lady is gettin’ out.

MRS. R. Well, if she ain’t a-comin’ right in here. Run out, quick, all of
you. You ain’t one of you dressed fit to be seen by a lady like that. (_A
knock—she shoos them out._) And I ain’t fit neither. Oh, my! (_She turns
her apron wrong side out, hastily picks up some stockings from the floor.
Another knock. She opens door._) How d’ye do? Won’t you come in? It’s a
fine day, ain’t it?

MRS. VAN (_steps one step inside the door_). I believe you are the person
who takes care of the rooms occupied by the “Ladies’ Literary Club,” are
you not?

MRS. R. Yes, ma’am. There ain’t nothin’ wrong, is there?

MRS. V. (_ignoring her question as before_). I am Mrs. Van Dusen, of the
charitable committee of the club. I presume you have some children?

MRS. R. Pleased to meet you, Mrs. Van Dusen. I am Mrs. Randy. Yes, I have
five children.

MRS. V. Oh, yes. (_Aside._) What large families these people have. I
see my surmise was correct. I presume you have nothing ready for their
Christmas?

MRS. R. Yes, I have for two of ’em, though it ain’t what I’d like. See.
(_Showing the gloves._) Mary’ll be real pleased to have these. They’re
real ladies’ gloves, ain’t they?

MRS. V. Don’t say “ain’t.” It’s bad grammar and it gets on my nerves.
(_Looks at gloves through lorgnette._) Goodness! Those dirty things? You
ought at least to send them to the cleaners first, though even then they
are in dreadfully bad taste. But I must go, for I have other charitable
calls to make. Here is money to buy something for the children. (_Hands a
coin from her purse._)

MRS. R. Thank you; but I’d rather not. We’d a-done somehow if you hadn’t
called.

MRS. V. Now, Mrs. Randy, don’t be foolish. You know it is wrong to be
proud, and it is especially unbecoming to the poor. (_Puts money on the
table._) Now you can get presents for them and say they came from Mrs.
Van Dusen. Goodby. (_Exit._)

MRS. R. Well, I s’pose she means to be kind, but I must say I don’t think
she knows how very well. I didn’t want to take her money, but now I’ll
have to. I wish Providence didn’t provide in such queer ways, sometimes.
Well—as she says—it’s wrong to be proud, so I’ll get something with it.
(_Picks up the coin._) Fifty cents. Now ain’t that fine? Why, I can
buy some presents and most a Christmas dinner, too. But I must get the
children to bed early so I can fix things up. (_Calls at the door._)
Mary! Teddy! Oh, children! All of you come in now. (_Children enter._)

MARY. Who was that lady, Ma?

TEDDY. What did she come for, anyway?

JOHNNY. Gee! But wasn’t that a swell automobile, though!

ANNIE _and_ SUSIE. Ma, who was it?

MRS. R. Just you wait till tomorrow an’ see. It’s a secret now, and if
you ask another word I won’t tell at all. Were you playin’ with the Smith
youngsters?

MARY. Yes. An’ oh, Ma. They’re a-goin’ to hang up their stockin’s. Can’t
we hang up ours, too?

MRS. R. Now, I just wondered if you’d remember about tonight’s being
Christmas Eve, and you did, didn’t you?

MARY. Yes, of course.

TEDDY. You bet.

MRS. R. We ain’t got no chimney, and Santa Claus can’t come that way,
but you just hang ’em on the back of the chair and I’ll leave the door
open so he can get in that way, and I hope he’ll not forget and pass us
by. Now, Mary, here’s a stockin’ for you. The foot is too full of holes
for you to wear ’em, or me to darn ’em; so I just sewed it across the
heel, and it’ll have to do. Teddy, I must have lost your other stockin’;
anyway I can’t find ’em now, so you can just use this old sock that used
to be your father’s before he went to the Philippines. And here are your
stockin’s, Johnnie, and Susie and Annie. (_Helps pin them up._) Now you
all get to bed quick’s you can. Mary, you look after the little ones,
won’t you? You see, I’ve got so much to do to make things tidy for Santa
Claus, that I can’t bother ’bout ’em. Now just scoot! All of you. And
don’t you dare peek, or Santa Claus won’t leave you nothin’. (_All hurry
off. MRS. R. opens the table drawer and takes out gloves and tie and
places them on the chair, gets apples and puts in the stockings, also._)
Now that ain’t enough for ’em all, so I’ll go buy somethin’ with that
money. (_Musingly._) Let me see. Oh, yes; I know. (_Door opens and TEDDY
puts head in, saying, “Ma.” MRS. R. slams drawer shut and hurriedly
covers chair with apron, then answers, “What?”_).

TEDDY. Ma, where’s my nightgown?

MRS. R. Land sakes, Teddy. I forgot. I lent it to Mrs. McRoy to cut a
pattern for Joe, an’ I s’pose she forgot to bring it back.

TEDDY. But Ma, what’ll I do?

MRS. R. Wear Johnnie’s other one.

TEDDY. Can’t. It’s too little.

MRS. R. Well, then wear Mary’s other one, but for goodness sakes go to
bed or Santa Claus won’t never come. (_Children go out._) Now I’ll go
over to the store and get some things. I’ve a fine idea. (_Puts on shawl
and hat, takes basket._) I’ll be back in a minute, and they won’t know
I’ve been away. (_Exit. After a moment the door opens and MARY puts her
head in. Dodges back and then enters in nightdress. Closes door and
starts to go toward the table, when the door opens again and TEDDY starts
in. She motions him back, tries to push him out, then pulls him in and
both go to the table. The door again opens and the others come in in
their nightgowns. All go toward the table on tip-toe, stop and listen and
rush out. After a pause the children come cautiously in and get nearly to
the table when they hear their mother coming, and rush out again. MRS. R.
enters with a loaded basket on her arm, sets it on the table._)

MRS. R. There we are. Things for a good dinner, anyhow. I know what I’ll
do for the playthings. (_Takes off shawl and hat, sits down and works.
Directions for this at the end._) Susie always did want a doll baby, and
here’s one she can’t smash. (_She works with frequent pauses, holding
up her work from time to time._) I think that is real scrumptious. I’ve
seen ’em in stores lots of times that didn’t look a mite better. Won’t
she be tickled? And I’ve thought how to make a elephant just like the
one in the store that Joe’s been begging for. Here’s just the thing.
Queer how things grow sometimes. You can work hard and you can’t do no
better than nature. See that now! You never know what you can do till you
try. ’Tain’t quite what I wanted, but it’ll have to do. Leastwise it’s
all he’ll get, so he’d better like it. There’s Annie, now. She’s allus
beggin’ for something pretty, so I got her some beautiful tissue paper to
cut out fancy. (_Takes paper from basket._) It only cost three cents, and
she’ll be just happy. (_She begins to put things in stockings. Knock at
door. She opens door to a lady._) How do you do, Miss? Have you lost your
way? I can show you real easy.

MRS. GRAHAM. Thank you, but I think this is where I wanted to come.
Aren’t you Mrs. Randy, the mother of little Mary and Teddy, and Susie,
Annie and Johnny?

MRS. R. Yes, ma’am, they are my little folks. I hope they haven’t broken
anything, or made any trouble. Are you one of the school teachers or
anything like that? How did you know them?

MRS. G. Oh, no. I’m not a school teacher; only a friend of one of the
teachers; and as I have no little children of my own I wanted to find
some little folks to help have a good time this Christmas. Just think how
lonely it would be not to have any children to share your Christmas with.
So I am going to ask you to let me have the pleasure of giving something
to yours. Won’t you? Please let me, Mrs. Randy.

MRS. R. Well, I must say that it’s very kind and friendly of you to want
to do that; and when you ask it that way, of course I’ll let you if it
will give you pleasure, though I must say I would hate to take presents
from some. But you don’t know how thankful I am, for the children’s sake.
I just didn’t know what I was going to do for some of them.

MRS. G. Don’t say any more about it, please, but put these little things
with the others in their stockings tonight, and say they came from
Santa Claus. Wouldn’t you like to wear these yourself? (_Hands her the
red holly berries from her own dress._) They will be becoming to you.
Good-night, and a merry Christmas.

MRS. R. Thanks, ma’am. The same to you and many of ’em. (_Exit MRS. G._)
There now, just look at that. (_Surveying the parcels._) I ought to
be pretty kind if I am to deserve such a friend. How different she is
from that Mrs. Van Dusen. Why, I declare. She didn’t even tell me her
name. I guess she wasn’t thinkin’ much about herself. Well, this surely
does make me happy. I wonder what’s in this bundle. (_Opens it, admires
things, fills stockings._) And now, so much has happened that I should be
perfectly happy if I could only get word from my John in the Philippines.
It’s been so long since I heard from him that I can’t help bein’ worried
’bout him. Seems as if he surely wouldn’t let Christmas go by without
sendin’ me word—if he’s alive—but it’s been so long—(_knock at the door.
A voice asks, “Is this Flower Street?”_) No, this ain’t Flower Street.
You’ve got a long way off. You go down that way (_pointing_) nearly half
a mile and you’ll cross it. Good-night. (_Comes in and sits down again._)
Dear me. That gave me quite a turn. I must be gettin’ silly tonight, but
it does seem as if my John was a-comin’—or was near—or somethin’. (_Knock
at the door, which she opens to receive a telegram, which she reads, then
waves it over her head, calling to the children, who run in in their
nightgowns._) Oh, hurry! Merry Christmas! Oh, just think! Your father is
comin’ tomorrow!

CHILDREN (_dancing around the chair_). Santa Claus has been here already!
Hurrah! Hurrah! Merry Christmas!

CURTAIN.


DIRECTIONS.

When Mrs. Randy returns from her purchase of Christmas things, she lays
aside her hat and shawl, sits down and takes a clothes-pin or a potato
from the basket. If a potato is used, one of the odd-shaped ones with a
small, round knob at one end, which can be made to look like the head of
the doll, is best. Then out of the table drawer she takes some pieces of
bright cloth and dresses the potato, or clothes-pin, for a doll, tying on
a skirt with a string, folding a square of cloth for a shawl and pinning
it on the shoulders, and folding another piece for a bonnet, and tying it
on with a bit of string. No sewing is needed.

The elephant for Joe is made of potatoes or carrots. A large oblong one
is the body; a small long one is the trunk, fastened to the body by long
wire nails or brads. In the same way four small ones form the legs of the
beast; two large, black-headed pins are the eyes, and two flaps of brown
paper, pinned on, the ears. A square of red cloth is a blanket for the
back, and is pinned to place. The tail is a bit of string with ravelled
end.

These things made, as she talks, with fitting pauses, and held up to
view, cause much merriment among the children in the audience.




READY FOR SANTA CLAUS.

_Illustrated Song for Twenty-seven or More Children._

_This is an attractive form of entertainment for the younger grades of
school. Just the number indicated may be used, or more of each kind can
be added as desired._

_Directions at the close._


SONG.

CANDY BAGS—

_Tune: “Rig-a-jig.”_

(_CANDY BAGS march around the stage, then stand at front, on left side,
in double row facing the audience, and sway from right to left in time as
they continue the song. They should be singing as they enter._)

    In stockings by the fireside hung,
    Wherever wreaths and toys are strung,
    At Christmas time our praise is sung,
          Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho!
    What joy we bring at Christmas tide,
    What pleasure scatter far and wide,
    We are the Christmas candy bags,
          Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho!

                  CHORUS.
    We are the Christmas candy bags,
        The candy bags, the candy bags,
    We are the Christmas candy bags,
          Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho! Heigh-ho!

PACKAGES—

_Tune: “Solomon Levi.”_

(_They enter at rear, march across the stage, then turn and march back
toward the entrance, but a space forward. This is during the first two
lines. When the SKATES sing, all halt and front face during the next two
lines._)

ALL—

    We are the various Packages that come at Christmas time,
    So interesting, so delightful, aren’t we big and prime?

(_All halt, front face. SKATES step forward, bow, hold out their hands to
audience and sing._)

    We are the Skates for Joe and Jim, for Nell and Polly Ann,
    And won’t they shout when we come out?
    Just beat us if you can.

ALL—

(_Resume the march as before, turning back to the other side when they
reach one side, thus weaving back and forth across the stage, and getting
a little nearer the front each time._)

    Oh, isn’t it jolly, tra-la-la-la-la-la,
    Green wreaths and holly, tra-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la,

(_Halt, GLOVES step forward and sing._)

GLOVES—

    And we are the Gloves for Mary, and for Bess and Sister Sue,
    We’ll help them dress in tip-top style
    And that is what we’ll do.

(_All mark time and continue._)

ALL—

    Christmas is a-coming soon and everything’s fine and gay,
    Hurrah, then, for the Christmas time, it is the merriest day!

PACKAGE—

(_Steps forward, sings, steps back. Others the same._)

    I am a silk dress for Mother, I am rich and dainty, too,

ANOTHER PACKAGE—

    And I’m a shawl for Grandma dear, both warm and bright in hue.

ANOTHER PACKAGE—

    And I’m some furs for little May, oh won’t she happy be?

ANOTHER PACKAGE—

    And I’m the book that Helen wants, she’ll gladly welcome me.

ALL (_resuming the march_)—

    Oh, isn’t it jolly. Tra-la-la-la-la-la.
    Green wreaths and holly, tra-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la.

(_Halt, front face._)

JEWELRY—

    And we are the necklaces and pins, the dainty, sparkling rings
    Which all the girls are longing for, they love such pretty things.

ALL (_marking time_)—

    Christmas is a-coming soon, and everything’s fine and gay,
    Hurrah, then, for the Christmas time, it is the jolliest day.

ALL (_repeat and march_)—

    Oh, isn’t it jolly. Tra-la-la-la-la-la.
    Green wreaths and holly, tra-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la-la.
    For we are the various Packages that come at Christmas time,
    So interesting, so delightful, aren’t we big and prime?
    Christmas is a-coming soon, and everything’s fine and gay,
    Hurrah, then, for the Christmas time, it is the jolliest day.

(_The PACKAGES stand behind the CANDY BAGS._)

TIN SOLDIERS—

_Tune: “Co-ca-che-lunk.”_

(_SOLDIERS are heard behind the scenes marking time. Music soft at first.
As it grows louder the marking time grows louder; then they enter, march
to the center of the stage and halt in two lines, facing the audience._)

    We are coming, for ’tis Christmas, and it’s time that we were here,
    For the little boys are waiting
    And our duty is most clear.

(_Mark time stiffly and vigorously._)

    We are tin soldiers, and we’re marching,
      See how we move so straight and grand.
    We are tin soldiers, and we’re coming,
      Heigh-ho! Can’t you just hear the band?

(_March during the next few lines to front and right of the stage
opposite the CANDY BAGS, halt and front face. At the chorus mark time as
before._)

    See our uniforms so gorgeous
      And our gay tin guns that shine,
    All the little boys will greet us
      As we stand so straight in line.
    We are tin soldiers, and we’re marching.
      See how we move so straight and grand,
    We are tin soldiers, and we’re coming,
      Heigh-ho! Can’t you just hear the band?

DOLLS—

(_Enter, stand in the center in two rows, the rag doll and the baby’s
knit doll in front, the others behind in couples. When one or more sing
they step to the front, and after singing stand in line in front of the
TIN SOLDIERS, who move back to give them room._)

_Tune: “The Wearing of the Green.”_

ALL (_sing_)—

    We are the dolls who come to little girls on the Christmas tree.
    We’re sent by good old Santa, and we’re glad as we can be,
    Our little mothers love us well, but we’re not quite sure
    Of the fate we’ll meet from children sweet, or the ills we must endure.

RAG DOLL—

    I’m the best loved of the dollies;
    I’m the old Rag Doll, you see.
    There’s no other doll who’s ever
    Loved so much as I shall be.

ALL—

    Oh, we all are the best-loved dollies;
    Little girls will love us well,
    And we’ll always be to the Christmas tree
    Worth more than tongue can tell.

KNIT DOLL—

    I’m going to live with the darling child,
    She of the blue, blue eyes.
    I love her, but I know she’s sure
    To give me much surprise.
    But let her pound me, poke my eyes out,
    Chew me, pull my hair,
    I’ll love her, for she’ll love poor me—
    The darling baby fair.

CHEAP DOLL—

    I’m the cheapest of the dolls; my home will be both poor and mean,
    But my owner’s sure to love me true as if I were a queen.

ALL—

    Oh, we all are the best-loved dollies;
    Little girls will love us well,
    And we’ll always be to the Christmas tree
    Worth more than tongue can tell.

FRENCH DOLLS—

    We are the most expensive dolls
    That can be bought and sold;
    Yet Santa sends us, just the same,
    For little girls to hold.

ALL—

(_Pointing to the broken dolls who are moving slowly toward the front._)

    Who is it coming? What a sight!
    It moves us all to tears.

BROKEN DOLLS—

    We are the poor dolls who’re played out;
    We’ve furnished fun for years.

FRENCH DOLLS—

    Oh, it surely is most shocking. Shall we all be treated so?

BROKEN DOLLS—

    We are glad we came; we’re loved the same
    As all the rest, you know.

ALL—

    Oh, we all are the best-loved dollies;
    Little girls will love us well,
    But we’ll always be to the Christmas tree
    Worth more than tongue can tell.

(_The pianist now plays a lively march, and all the toys parade around
the stage and off._)


DIRECTIONS.

The CANDY BAGS are four little girls, two dressed in red and two in
white. Their dresses are of tarletan or cheesecloth over slips of the
same color. They are just wide enough to go over the ordinary dresses
and long enough to reach from the neck to an inch or so below the bottom
of their skirts. Let all be the same length. The top of the bags (or
dresses) are gathered with a ruffle around the children’s necks. Their
arms are kept inside of the dresses.

The PACKAGES are ten boys or girls, or both. Their costumes are shaped
of cardboard, inside of which the children stand, their legs showing
below and their arms coming through at the sides. Holes are cut through
the cardboard for them to see and breathe through, and these holes must
be located so as to be the inner corners of the eyes, or in the nose of
the large faces which must be marked upon the wrappings of the packages.
Close fitting sleeves of the same color as the paper wrapping the
packages are upon the arms, and the stockings should also match the paper.

The package of skates is covered with brown paper over a cylinder of
cardboard, with a twist at the top and tied with a large cord.

The DRESS, also of brown paper, but larger, and in an oblong parcel.

GRANDMA’S shawl, a lighter brown paper, tied with ribbon.

JEWELRY and GLOVES, smaller, one flat, one round, covered with white
paper and tied with red ribbon.

The TIN SOLDIERS are six little boys. Trousers long, of shiny blue
cambric with yellow stripes at the sides; shiny red jackets, with buttons
and bands across the front and on sleeves of yellow. Toy guns. Their
cheeks and lips should be very red to imitate the toy soldiers, and they
should walk straight and very stiffly, and not turn their head.

The DOLLS are seven little girls.

Two are dressed to imitate French dolls.

One for a rag doll.

One for a cheap doll, imitating it as closely as possible.

One for a knit doll for the baby.

Two for broken dolls. Of these latter have one without an arm (held
hidden under the dress) and limping on a crutch, and the other dressed
so as to seem to have no head. This can be done by making the dress with
its neck above the head of the wearer, thus leaving the doll without a
head. Have but one arm, and the dress waist and real arms hidden under a
“Mother Hubbard” dress. The clothes must be faded and ragged.




SANTA CLAUS’ GARDEN.

_For Eight Characters._


    SANTA CLAUS                 ⎫       _Adults or Large Boys_
    DEENO, _the Gardener_       ⎭
    JACKS IN THE BOX                    _Three Small Boys_
    FRENCH DOLLS                        _Three Small Girls_


DIRECTIONS AT CLOSE.

SANTA. It is a fine day, a very fine day. I’ve been looking all over my
toy garden and things are growing very well indeed. The bicycles are all
in bloom and the velocipedes are full of buds. (_Inspects the trumpet
vines._) These trumpets are about ripe. (_Calls._) Deeno! Hey there,
Deeno!

DEENO (_enters, touches hat, says_). Here I am, sir. What is it, sir?

SANTA. I think these trumpets are ripe, Deeno. Have them picked at once.
If they get too ripe, you know, they’ve a bad sound to them and then
they’re not popular. (_Pulls one, blows it._) There! That has a fine
tone to it. Nobody could object to that now, could they, Deeno?

DEENO. No, sir, indeed. I’m sure not, sir.

SANTA. Ah, Deeno, you know a good thing when you hear it. You’re a sly
rogue. (_Shakes finger at Deeno._) But, Deeno, I don’t see those skate
vines. You surely didn’t forget to plant them.

DEENO. Oh, no, sir. Indeed, sir! I planted ’em twice, sir; but the seed
must have been bad, for not one of ’em grew, sir.

SANTA (_much excited_). _What!_ No skates for my boys this Christmas?
Whatever shall I do? Why, _Deeno!_ You should have told me before.

DEENO. Oh, sir; it’s all right, sir. I sent to the South Pole by a flying
machine man, and spoke for their whole crop of skates, sir, and they got
here this morning.

SANTA. Good for you, Deeno! You have taken a load off my mind. You’ve
never failed me yet. Let me see some of them.

DEENO. All right, sir. (_Exits. SANTA examines the drum tree._)

SANTA. Doing well. Doing well. They’ll ripen in time for Christmas. Some
are most ready now. (_Taps various drum—examines buds—calls._) Hey,
Deeno! (_DEENO enters._) Oh! Here you are. (_DEENO has wheelbarrow full
of boxes wrapped, and two or three open, showing skates. Hands them to
SANTA, who examines them. Then he turns to the drum tree._) Where are all
the sticks for these drums?

DEENO. Bless you, sir! They’re growing right along, rows and rows of ’em,
sir. And when the wind blows ’em, sir, they act as if they were trying to
drum. Yes, sir, they do.

SANTA (_smiling_). They’ll have a chance to drum before long. I’ve
selected boys for every pair of them. (_Turns to skates again._) So these
are the skates, hey? Pretty fair skates, but not quite up to your work.
Hey, Deeno? (_DEENO grins and touches hat._) But I think the boys who get
them won’t grumble. (_Takes up a pair of roller skates._) And these are
the rollers. Are they all like these?

DEENO. Yes, sir. All alike, sir.

SANTA. That’ll do. Take ’em in to Mrs. Santa Claus, and ask her to see to
it that they are properly labeled. She’ll find the list of the boys and
girls they’re going to in my desk.

DEENO. Yes, sir. All right, sir. (_Goes off._)

SANTA (_bending down to examine them_). These tea set plants are very
slow growing this year. I’ll have them planted earlier next year. Just
see how small these dishes are. Those on the east side of the garden
are much larger than these. (_Examines plants in pots, opens the buds,
one after another, and shows the dolls within._) Oh, here you are, Miss
Dolly! You are to go to a dear little girl, so you must hurry up and
grow. And you (_to another doll bud_) will go into Annie’s stocking. And
you (_to another_) will go to lame Mary. Oh, yes, I think dolls are one
of the most satisfactory crops. (_Turns to the FRENCH DOLLS, who are
covered by a frame of mosquito netting._) Now these big French dolls are
very hard to grow. I see Deeno has them covered. (_Calls._) Deeno! Oh,
Deeno!

DEENO (_hurries in_). Yes, sir; I’m coming, sir.

SANTA. Why are you sheltering these dolls again this year? Is it the wind?

DEENO. No, indeed, sir. The wind wouldn’t hurt ’em, sir. It’s the birds,
sir.

SANTA. Birds! I never heard of such a thing. Birds injure them when they
have grown to that size?

DEENO. Oh, yes, indeed, sir. Why, they spoiled two long-rows of ’em last
week, just after I transplanted ’em, sir.

SANTA. How spoil them?

DEENO. Pick their eyes out, sir. That’s how they spoil ’em. Oh, yes, sir.

SANTA. Let’s see them. (_They lift off the netting._) Well, these are
beauties, Deeno. They certainly are beauties. Any of ’em talk?

DEENO. This one, sir. (_They wind her up. She says “Papa” and “Mamma.”_)

SANTA. _I_ think these had better be picked.

DEENO. Perhaps so, sir. (_They appear to loosen the doll, lift her from
her leaves and set her out in the path. In the same way they set the
other two out._)

SANTA. We’ll take those in with us when we go. Better try those balls
over there. (_Pointing. DEENO goes to the ball tree and tries several of
the balls._)

DEENO. We’ll pick these about next week, sir. They’re green yet.

SANTA. How are these Jacks-in-the-box? Have any of them popped yet?

DEENO. Yes, sir. One or two of ’em, sir. They must be quite ready by now,
sir.

SANTA (_opens a box, JACK springs up_). Just see that! (_DEENO opens a
second box and SANTA a third. The JACKS pop up._) And here’s another! I
always did like a good Jack-in-the-box, and they nearly always make me
jump a little. (_To JACK._) Go in there again. (_Shuts cover, opens it
again._) Oh, there you are! (_Tries each one two or three times. Leaves
them standing._) Well, Deeno, set those dolls out of the way and bring
up your wheelbarrow. (_DEENO does so. They put one JACK into the barrow.
DEENO wheels him away. SANTA lifts and carries off one of the dolls, the
curtain falls._)


DIRECTIONS.

Let the stage be set like the diagram. No. 1 is a trumpet vine, made of
branches fastened to the rear wall or curtain, like a vine, with a few
tin trumpets, and many to simulate them of cardboard, sticking out on the
vines like blossoms.

No. 2 is a tree as large as is feasible, with large buds of green tissue
paper, some closed, others parted and showing small drums in the center.

[Illustration: _Directions_]

The leaves forming these buds should be a pointed oval in shape, and vary
in size as they represent buds or open flowers. The drums hang down from
the branches and the petals, when open, hang over and partly cover them.
See Fig. 1.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1._]

No. 3 is another tree hung with bright-colored balls of tissue paper,
representing candies.

Nos. 4 and 5 are clusters of branches arranged to look as if growing, and
about three feet high, hung with balls of various kinds and colors.

Nos. 6, 7 and 8 are three little girls who are dressed to represent
French dolls. They stand in a row facing the audience. At either end of
the row is a frame to support the cheesecloth or mosquito netting which
covers them all over, until SANTA is ready for them. Their part, of
course, is to stand stiffly, like dolls, not turning their heads, and
with their arms held out in front like the small china dolls. One is to
say “Papa” and “Mamma” when the signal is given her.

No. 12 is a row of flower pots or boxes, in which appear to be growing
the doll plants. These are branches which stand about eighteen inches
high, with buds made of tissue paper, like those on the drum trees. These
buds conceal as many dolls as can be hung on the plants, some large, some
smaller.

No. 13 is a similar row of plants similarly arranged, on which are
fastened the various dishes of tea sets.

Nos. 9, 10 and 11 are boxes about two feet high and eighteen inches
square (or of the size to accommodate small boys stooping). These
boxes have paper leaves around them. The boys should be dressed like
Jacks-in-the-box, with frizzly hair, grotesquely painted faces, etc.
Their part is to remain hidden in the boxes till SANTA opens them (they
should be provided with stools to sit on or they cannot keep still.);
then to spring up suddenly and remain standing until shut in again.


COSTUMES.

SANTA CLAUS wears the traditional costume, and DEENO may be short and
fat, or tall and very thin. He wears blue overalls and a broad-brimmed
hat, and a fringe of white whiskers around his face.




SANTA CLAUS IN MANY LANDS.

_For Twenty Characters—Six Girls, Nine Boys, Four Little Children and One
Adult._


    AMERICA    ⎫
    HINDUSTAN  ⎪
    CHINA      ⎪
    SCOTLAND   ⎪
    IRELAND    ⎬      _Boys_
    RUSSIA     ⎪
    INDIAN     ⎪
    PHILIPPINE ⎪
    ESQUIMAU   ⎭
    FRANCE     ⎫
    GERMANY    ⎪
    JAPAN      ⎪
    ENGLAND    ⎬      _Girls_
    SPAIN      ⎪
    ITALY      ⎭
    SANTA CLAUS, _An Adult_.
    FOUR LITTLE CHILDREN.

_This is good to introduce a school Christmas tree. At the close of the
play let SANTA CLAUS distribute the gifts with the help of the various
characters._

_If desired, the number participating can be doubled by having a boy and
a girl for each country. Or, the number can be reduced by omitting some
of the characters and the lines referring to them. As the stanzas are not
of set length they can easily be reduced or combined. Costumes at end of
the play._

_AMERICA enters_—

    Christmas is coming. How glad I am
    That I live where there is an Uncle Sam.
    I suppose it is Christmas everywhere,
    But for some Christmases I wouldn’t care.
    It can’t be jolly in Hindustan,
    For there it is never what I would plan.

_HINDUSTAN enters_—

    No country is quite so good as mine
    Where Buddha and Brahmin rule and shine.
    We follow their birthdays all the year,
    And many a feast-day comes to cheer.
    Is Santa Claus Brahmin? I do not know,
    Is Christmas Buddha? Where does it go?

(_To AMERICA._)

    Why do you seem to love him so?
    And what is Christmas, I’d like to know?

_GERMANY enters_—

    Our own is the dearest Fatherland
        Of any that there can be.
    Kriss Kringle brings toys to all who are good,
    With cakes and sweetmeats and all nice food,
        And the beautiful Christmas tree.
    And always we in dear Germany
    Are glad when the Christ-child comes.
    He leaves fine gifts and brings much joy
    To every good little girl and boy
        In all the dear German homes.

_CHINA enters_—

    Melican Santa Claus velly big Joss.
    Me sabe (_pronounced “sabby”_) him, me likee.
    He tellee me allee time bling toys when me good,
    Me likee, me be good allee time. Sabe?
    My countlee (_country_) we hab plenty big Joss
    No same like Melican Santa.
    Santa tellee me be good all time, to ev’ly body.
    Me sabe him. Me likee.

_FRANCE enters_—

    Maybe your wonderful Christmas time
    Is not quite alike in every clime,
    But here, in beautiful, sunny France
    It brings us music and many a dance,

(_Whirls and dances through these two lines._)

    With feasting and calling on each dear friend,
    With pleasure and jollity without end.

(_Bows, curtseys back to place, throwing kisses._)

_IRELAND enters_—

    Ould Scotland has her heather,
    An’ England has her rose,
    But Ireland has her shamrock green,
    The darlin’est thing that grows.
    An’ to you now, ould Santy,
    We bring the shamrock dear.
    It manes good luck to ivery wan,
    An’ good luck all the year.
    An’ whin ’tis Christmas comin’
    Wid all its games an’ toys,
    Oh, thin ’tis sure the shamrock land
    Is best fur gurruls an’ boys.

_ESKIMO enters_—

    It is cold and beautiful where I live,
    No place can be quite so good;
    But the things I hear about today
    I have not quite understood.
    But Santa, you say, loves children well,
    And I hope he’ll visit me,
    For my country lies along his way
    When he comes from the Arctic sea.
    Come bring my people, Santa dear,
    The happy times they tell of here.

_RUSSIA enters_—

    Midst the great white snows of our great white land
    Live hundreds of boys and girls,
    And Christmas time brings us many a joy
    As the snow and the storm wind whirls.
    No Christmas tree, but a gathering great
    Of friends by the warm house fire,
    With games and giving,—oh! Christmas time
    Is the Russian child’s desire.

_ENGLAND enters_—

    Christmas is coming in England dear.
    ’Tis the gladdest time of all the year;
    With the big boar’s head, with the pudding ablaze,
    ’Tis the merriest one of all our days.
    The Waits are singing—the Mummers shout,—
    In the great cathedrals the bells ring out.
    For rich and poor, for young and old,
    The Christmas message is sung and told.
    “Peace, peace on earth, good will to men,”
    We love to sing it each year again.

_SCOTLAND enters_—

    In bonnie Scotland, our own rugged land,
    Where moors and mountains are so wild and grand,
    We go most soberly to our dear kirk
    And hear the sermons—rather serious work
    For us it is sometimes—but still we love
    To hear the story of the Lord above.
    No Christmas tree we have, but quiet giving.
    We trust to goodness in our daily living.

IRELAND—(_Speaking to ENGLAND and SCOTLAND as he joins them._)

    We’re cousins—the three of us—what do we care
    How different—or same—are our countries, they’re fair
    To each of us. Isn’t it so? Then hurrah!
    Hurrah for ould Christmas, whoever we are!

_SPAIN enters_—

    In sunny Spain we celebrate with flowers;
    The sweet guitar with music fills the hours.
    We do not have a tree; in hall or street
    Our gifts are given to the friends we meet.
    Christmas is gay for us in sunny Spain,
    We’re always glad when gift-time comes again.

_ITALY enters_—

    The sun shines fair upon our Italy,
    And gives its gold to everything we see.
    And when the blessed Christ-child comes each year
    We worship him, and beg that he will hear
    And bless us as we kneel, and so we know
    We shall be happy everywhere we go.
    And when again our homes we reach, there, piled,
    Are lovely things sent by the holy child.

_JAPAN enters_—

    Our holy Buddha has a birthday, too,
    A sacred day it is. The children strew
    The lovely flowers all along the way,
    And chant the legends of that holy day.
    All have new robes, and every girl and boy
    Wish for their elders greatest peace and joy,
    And then receive sweet cakes and cups of tea.
    No children anywhere more blest could be.

_PHILIPPINE enters_—

    They come to our islands far beyond the seas
    And tell us of such lands and tribes as these.
    They teach us words like “peace,” “to men good will,”
    And show us what it is to drive and kill.
    I can’t quite understand the things they say,
    It seems to me a very curious way;
    But these are children just like me, and so
    They have good times in their own lands, I know.
    If Santa Claus can make me glad like these,
    And bring such ways to us beyond the seas,
    I’m ready now to follow—love him, too,—
    And then perhaps I’ll know just what is true,
    Know what it means to hear now and again
    Such words as “love” and “peace, good will to men.”

_INDIAN enters_—

(_Walks slowly to his place, folds arms, looks about him, speaks slowly._)

    You speak too many words. All spirits good
    Will love all children dwelling in the wood
    Or tepees of the land. They take
    Great care of all deserving ones, and make
    Them wise and great. Your toys we do not need.
    Still, if there’s a children’s saint, indeed,
    He might at Christmas time to us come round.
    The tales these tell (_pointing around_) have quite a pleasant sound.

CHILDREN—

(_Rush in pulling SANTA CLAUS with them, two at each hand. Others may be
with them to any desired number._)

SANTA—

    In every land the little children dwell,
    And all of them are mine; I love them well.
    Some call one day each year the Christmas day.
    And celebrate with joy. And some lands say
    That other days are best; yet every child
    Who’s good and kind, with tender hearts and mild
    To help another’s pain, or comfort tears,
    That child keeps Christmas day all through the years.
    All, all are mine. In every land or creed,
    Who love to help another’s want or need.

(_CHILDREN dance around SANTA CLAUS singing._)

_Tune: “For He’s a Jolly Good Fellow.”_

    Santa Claus has brought us Christmas,
    Santa Claus has brought us Christmas,
    Santa Claus has brought us Christmas,
        Hurrah for Christmas day!

(_All the characters join hands and skip around SANTA CLAUS, singing
together._)

        Hurrah for Christmas day!
        Hurrah for Christmas day!
    Santa Claus has brought us Christmas,
    Santa Claus has brought us Christmas,
    Santa Claus has brought us Christmas,
        Hurrah for Christmas day!

CURTAIN.


DIRECTIONS.

As each character enters and speaks, let him use gestures or actions
according to his words. This must be left to the judgment of the one in
charge.


COSTUMES.

SANTA CLAUS—Traditional red suit and cap, long whiskers, etc.

FOUR LITTLE CHILDREN—Any pretty dress.

AMERICA—Modern dress.

HINDUSTAN—White robe with loose sleeves. This reaches to the feet. Wide
white belt, white turban.

IRELAND—Green stockings, low, buckled shoes, gray knee trousers, white
blouse waist, green tie, gray jacket.

ESKIMO—Trousers, jacket and pointed hood of fur. Cotton flannel with the
fuzzy side out answers very well.

INDIAN—Moccasins, brown overalls with a pleat laid on the outside of the
leg, thus fitting it as close as is convenient. Over this pleat is a
fringe of brown leather or tan cotton. Bright blanket over the shoulders.
Red band around the head, with feathers standing up in it. Long black
hair, painted face.

SCOTLAND—Highland dress; plaid kilt and stockings, low shoes, dark jacket
and red or plaid sash over the shoulder; fur pouch in front; Scotch cap.

CHINA—Wide, loose trousers and blouse of dark blue, round cap of blue or
black, with red button on top; “pigtail” and slanting eyes.

FRANCE—Fancy pink and blue frilled dress, arms and neck bare, slippers.

PHILIPPINE—Close fitting waist and tights of brown, hands and face brown,
woolly wig. Skirt of raffia or grass reaching to the knees. Beads around
the neck; carries a spear.

GERMANY—Blue skirt to ankles, white waist, black bodice, Dutch cap with
flaps turned back from the face, long flaxen braids.

JAPAN—Gay kimono and sash, hair dressed high with tiny fans stuck in it.

SPAIN—Yellow dress with black bands around it, black bodice, large gay
fan, hair dressed with high back comb and large red roses below each ear.

ITALY—Green skirt with bands of bright trimming, white waist and apron,
black bodice. Hair in braids with white headdress, which is a band of
muslin six or seven inches wide and sixteen to eighteen inches long, one
end pinned on top of the head, the other falling behind.

RUSSIA—High, fur-trimmed boots, dark skirt and jacket and cap, all
trimmed with fur.

ENGLAND—A fair child with delicate features. Modern dress.




THE SPIRIT OF CHRISTMAS.

_A Sketch._

_For Eight Characters—Four Males, Four Females._


CHARACTERS.

    MR. RADCLIFFE      _Bachelor of 35, or Thereabouts_
    BOB                             _The Janitor’s Boy_
    BILL                     _Who Brings Home His Suit_
    JIMMY                      _MR. RADCLIFFE as a Boy_
    MISS DAYTON             _Lady in the Late Twenties_
    GRETCHEN                              _German Maid_
    ANNETTE                         _Washwoman’s Child_
    KITTY                       _MISS DAYTON as a Girl_


SCENE: _Interior of MISS DAYTON’S room. Table with books and sewing upon
it, two chairs and a lounge, etc. MISS D. sits reading._

MISS DAYTON (_puts down book, yawns_). Heigh-ho! What a dreary day! Cold
as Greenland, and raining as well. If I had _my_ way in the making of the
world we never would have had such days as this. (_Knock at door._) Come
in.

_Enter GRETCHEN with letters._

GRETCHEN. Some letters, Miss Dayton.

MISS D. Very well, Gretchen. Put them on the table.

GRET. (_picking up scraps, dusting, etc., as she talks_). It vas a nice
day, Miss Dayton.

MISS D. _I_ think it is a horrid day, Gretchen.

GRET. Nein, Miss Dayton. It vas by Christmas day. (_Smiles broadly._)

MISS D. What is that to me, Gretchen, or to any sensible person, for that
matter?

GRET. (_astonished_). Und you don’d like Christmas, Miss Dayton?

MISS D. Christmas is nothing, Gretchen. Nothing at all. Just a day for
silly people to spend money on foolish things, and other people to be
bored with their foolishness. You don’t catch me joining in any of it.

GRET. (_aghast_). But it vas _Merry_ Christmas, Miss Dayton.

MISS D. (_snappishly_). “Merry Christmas!” And what have I to be merry
about, I’d like to know?

GRET. Don’d you haf a fader, Miss Dayton?

MISS D. Dead, long ago.

GRET. Und a mudder? Und some brudders? (_Puts apron to her eye._) Ach
himmel! It makes me cry. I don’d haf ’em so long alretty yet.

MISS D. Oh, for goodness sake, Gretchen! Stop! I haven’t a living soul
who cares whether I live or die. And I don’t want to have, if the price
of them must be this nonsense about Christmas. If ever there was a
heathen custom carried out without cause or reason, this one of Christmas
is the one. Don’t talk to me.

GRET. Und you don’d half der Christmas kuchen? Und der ribbons? Und der
dinner? Und der Christmas heim-lied? Ach, Miss Dayton! It vas all so dear.

MISS D. (_angrily_). No! I tell you. No! (_After a pause, wearily._) How
much you talk.

GRET. (_pitifully_). Some of mein Christmas kuchen comes to you, Miss
Dayton, and then you vill not so lonely be.

MISS D. I don’t want it, Gretchen. I don’t want it. Why do you bother me
so? (_Takes up book._) Can’t you see I’m reading? Go and have your old
Christmas cakes, if you want them; but let me alone. (_Reads._)

GRET. (_backing toward the door and speaking timidly_). Und you don’d
_gif_ nottings on Christmas? (_No answer. She goes slowly out, turns
at the door, and says._) Tomorrow vas Christmas. (_No answer. Goes out
slowly, putting one eye to the crack of the door and looking long at MISS
D. before she softly closes it. MISS D. continues reading. Knock at the
door._)

MISS D. Come in. (_ANNETTE enters, poorly dressed. Carries a large basket
of laundry._) Oh, it’s you, Annette.

ANNETTE. Please, Miss Dayton, here’s yer washin,’ an’ Maw says cud ye be
afther payin’ her, ’cos termorrer’s Christmas.

MISS D. Certainly. Here’s your money. (_Pays her._) But surely your
mother won’t be so foolish as to spend her money on Christmas nonsense.

ANNETTE (_smiling_). Aw yis, miss. We do be goin’ ter have Christmis to
our house—an’ stockin’s hangin’ by the chimbly—an’ candy in ’em, an’
sich. An’ mebby sumpin’ nice—m—m! (_Nods her head and smiles knowingly._)

MISS D. (_sternly_). Now, Annette, that is actually wrong. When a woman
has to work as hard as your mother does to support seven children, it’s
worse than folly. It’s wicked to buy Christmas presents. As to Santa
Claus, there isn’t any such person, as of course you know. I really think
I shall make it my business to see your mother myself, and see if I can’t
stop such wasteful, useless doings.

ANNETTE (_with a wail_). Aw Miss Dayton! Now, don’t yer be doin’ that!
Not have Christmis? Aw! Yer don’ know what fun it be! Not have Christmas!
Aw Miss Dayton! Let us be, can’t yer? (_Hides her face in her apron and
sobs._)

MISS D. Now, Annette, stop this at once. You are a very silly child,
indeed. I’m quite surprised at you. Here’s your money, and when you get
home you tell your mother she is not to spend it for Christmas nonsense.
Do you hear? (_Resumes her reading._)

ANNETTE (_goes dejectedly to the door, but opens it again after she has
gone out, and puts her head in, calls._) Christmis gif! (_No answer—a
pause._) Christmis gif, Miss Dayton.

MISS D. Run along, child. No. No Christmas gifts from me. I don’t approve
of them at all. (_Resumes the reading of her letter. ANNETTE goes._) Of
all things! Here’s a letter from the ladies of the church asking me to
help with their Christmas tree for poor children. I think I see myself!
It is no better than a bid for pauperism. All nonsense! No indeed! Not
I. (_Reads other letter._) And if here isn’t more of the same! Mr.
Fletcher wants me to help a poor woman with four children so she can have
Christmas. The idea! As if there was nothing to use one’s money for but
buying toys and candy and such nonsense. (_Lets letter drop in her lap.
Seems to be thinking. Silence._)

CURTAIN.


SCENE II: _Interior of MR. RADCLIFFE’S room. Table, chairs, couch,
clothes scattered over the room. MR. R. is sitting reading the paper, his
feet on a chair. He puts paper down, yawns, resumes paper._

MR. RADCLIFFE. Jupiter! What a wretched day! Cold and rainy outside and
stupid and tiresome inside. (_Knock._) Come in. Oh, it’s you, is it, Bob?

BOB (_briskly_). Yessir. It’s me, sir. Here’s yer mail, sir.

MR. R. Toss ’em over, then. (_Drops paper, takes letters._) Beastly day.

BOB (_picking up MR. R.’S paper from the floor, setting chairs straight,
etc._) Oh, no, sir. Fine day, sir. Most Christmas, sir.

MR. R. (_sharply_). What of it, then? What if it is most Christmas?

BOB (_surprised_). W’y, sir! Ev’rybody’s glad w’en Christmas comes.

MR. R. I’m not. Why should I be glad? Tell me that.

BOB. W’y—Mr. Radcliffe! W’y—jes’—’cos—it’s Christmas.

MR. R. (_sitting up suddenly_). And what’s Christmas? Just a chance for
some fools to spend other fools’ money. (_Pounds table._) All foolery, I
tell you! All foolery!

BOB (_protesting_). Oh, Mr. Radcliffe! No, sir! Leastways not as I ever
see. We’re glad at Christmas, sir—and give things, sir, an’ gets ’em—an’
we feels kind to everybody, sir—that’s Christmas, sir.

MR. R. (_pounds table so suddenly BOB jumps_). Don’t contradict me, sir!
Do you hear? Don’t contradict me. I said it is all foolery, and it is.
(_BOB promptly departs._) And this fellow proves it when he talks as he
does. “Get ’em!” Of course. That’s all they want—to “get” things. “Feel
kind?” Slush! (_Puts feet on table, takes paper. Knock at door._) Come
in. What is it?

(_Small boy, BILL, with very large bundle._)

BILL. Here’s yer suit, sir. From the cleaners.

MR. R. Set it down. (_Resumes reading. BILL puts down the suit and waits.
After a moment MR. R. looks over his paper._) Well, what are you waiting
for?

BILL. Please, my paw—he says he’d like the pay, ’cos termorrer’s
Christmas. An’ here’s the bill. (_Offers it._)

MR. R. (_sarcastically_). I’ll warrant he’d like the pay. And he can have
it. But what in thunder does Christmas have to do with it?

BILL (_backing hastily away and putting the bill behind him._)
Please—we’re to have a tree; a little, nice tree. An’ paw—he’d like the
pay ’cos (_eagerly_) I’m to have a dandy knife, an’ maw’ll have a new
dress, an’ a pot o’ posies—and little Sis’ll have a new dress, an’ have
candy, too; an’—an’ it’s Christmas; a Christmas tree, sir.

MR. R. Here. Take it and get out. (_BILL goes hastily._) They are all
fools together, and a fool and his money belong to the Christmas crowd.
(_Boy puts head in and says timidly._)

BILL. Christmas gif’, please. (_Dodges out as MR. R. throws the paper at
him._)

MR. R. Thunderation! Are we to be pestered by gifts, too? Not if I know
it. (_Lies back in his chair again._) It’s a beastly day. (_Sees letters,
opens one._) I forgot these. (_Glances over it._) Here’s another fool.
That Phil Warner wants me to come to Christmas dinner. I look like going
to a Christmas dinner now, don’t I? (_Sarcastically._) Oh, yes! I’m the
kind that’ll go and admire the babies, and let them climb all over me—and
see them spoiled with this fol-de-rol about Christmas! No, thanks, old
boy. I have an appointment elsewhere. (_Takes up other letter, reads,
slams it down._) Is everybody Christmas crazy? Here’s the minister of
the church yonder asks me to contribute to their Christmas tree for poor
children. Now, that’s a little too much! I may be easy, but I’m not ready
for the asylum. (_Puts feet on the table, lies back in his chair, puts
handkerchief over his face. Silence._)

CURTAIN.


SCENE III: _When the curtain is drawn again it shows MR. R. seated at
front and extreme right of the stage, facing the center, with his feet
up and his handkerchief over his face as at close of last scene. At the
front and extreme left of the stage, and facing center, is MISS DAYTON,
asleep in her chair, as at close of Scene I. Between them, and set back
a little from the front, is a space eight feet wide by four or five feet
deep, curtained around with gray. For the best effect a gray gauze should
be stretched before this space, though it is not a necessity. Another
smaller curtain hangs before this space, and is drawn aside for each of
the dreams. Here are presented the tableaux representing the dreams of
the sleepers. Allow less than a minute to each dream._

DREAM I—A boy and a girl are walking together. They are in outdoor
garments, and he is offering her an apple, which she is about to take
shyly.

DREAM II—The same children. The boy is pulling a sled on which the girl
sits. He is looking back at her, and she is laughing.

DREAM III—The same children. Indoor scene and dress. The boy is bringing
in an armful of Christmas greens. The girl holds up to him the wreath of
holly and berries she has been making.

DREAM IV—The boy holds a piece of mistletoe over the girl’s head, and is
just ready to kiss her, while she laughingly holds the Christmas wreath
between them.

OUTER CURTAIN.


SCENE IV: _When the curtain is again drawn, it shows a high screen, or
a curtain through the middle of the stage from rear to front. On the
right side of this screen from the audience sits MR. RADCLIFFE, asleep
as he was during the dream pictures, and on the left side it shows MISS
DAYTON, asleep as she was then. Reproduce as much of the original rooms
as possible in the space. She rouses, sits up, looks about her with a
bewildered air. MR. R. remains asleep._

MISS D. How strange! It must have been a dream, yet it was so real.
(_Leans head on hand. Speaks musingly._) I wonder where Jimmy is now. We
used to be close chums for a long time. And what romps we used to have
at Christmas time. (_Silent a moment._) Why! This is Christmas Eve! Oh!
I remember that Gretchen talked about it. Poor Gretchen! I’m afraid I
was cross. No, I was rude—just plainly rude—to her because she was glad
Christmas was here. Jimmy always used to be so jolly at Christmas, and
so kind. I wish Gretchen—(_thinks a moment._) And there’s Annette! I was
worse than cross to her. I was unkind. I wish—(_rises_)—well—I’m old and
lonely—and I’ve been rude and unkind—but Christmas isn’t over yet, and
perhaps I can make it brighter for some of them. I’m going out to get
some things for Gretchen and Annette. (_Looks out of the window._) It’s
raining still, but what do I care! (_Puts on waterproof cloak and her
hat; takes umbrella._) It’s fun to be out in the rain. Jimmy and I used
to love to go out in the rain. Oh! I forgot my rubbers. (_Begins to put
them on._) How nicely Jimmy used to put mine on for me. My feet were
smaller then. (_Looks at her feet and smiles._) What fun we used to have
at Christmas! (_Hurries out._)

MR. R. (_rouses, pulls handkerchief from his face, takes feet down, sits
up and stares about him, exclaiming_) Why, Kitty! Oh! (_Disappointedly._)
It must have been a dream, but it seemed so real. (_Leans elbow on chair
arm and head on hand._) Say! But she was a pretty girl! And jolly, too!
And didn’t she love Christmas? What larks we used to have! We two—with
the Christmas trimmings and the mistletoe. (_Sits up suddenly._) And it’s
Christmas time now! What fun! (_Drooping dejectedly._) But that was long,
long ago. And I’m growing old, and—I think—I’m crusty and mean as well.
Yes, a crusty, mean old bachelor. That’s what I am. How I did act to
those boys this morning! Poor little chaps! (_Starts to his feet._) But
there’s time to get straight again. It’s Christmas Eve! (_Excitedly._)
Hurrah! (_Hurries on his hat and coat, catches up an umbrella._) I’ll
make it all right. They shall have their Christmas from me yet! (_Rushes
out._)

CURTAIN.


SCENE IV: _MISS D. enters at left, MR. R. at right. Both have umbrellas
held in front of them with heads bent down as if walking against a wind,
and hurry ahead. They run into each other, start back, lift umbrellas._

MR. R. I beg pardon, Madam. I didn’t see you. I’m out for some Christmas
shopping—

MISS D. No apologies needed. I am on the same errand—in memory of many
years ago.

MR. R. (_eagerly_). That’s my case, Madam—many years ago—(_stops, lifts
hat_). I beg pardon, I forgot myself.

MISS D. (_bowing and starting to go_). Good evening, and a merry
Christmas to you.

MR. R. A merry Christmas. (_They pass, then both stop and each looks
back at the other. He comes back._) You may think me a little out of
balance—but I must ask if you ever knew anyone by the name of Dayton?
Kitty Dayton, she used to be when I knew her. Your way of saying “Merry
Christmas” made me think of her.

MISS D. That is my name, but (_doubtfully_) you—?

MR. R. (_eagerly_). Did you ever know a boy named Jimmy Radcliffe? Many
years ago?

MISS D. Indeed, I did. Jimmy and I were good friends.

MR. R. I’m Jimmy! Aren’t we good friends still! (_Dropping umbrella,
she doing the same, he grasps both her hands._) Oh, Kitty! I mean—Miss
Dayton! I’ve never forgotten you, and today I dreamed I was Jimmy and you
were Kitty again, and we were having our Christmas larks together.

MISS D. (_eagerly_). So did I.

MR. R. And I had been beastly to some poor little chaps, and was going
out to set myself straight, if I could, and play Santa Claus.

MISS D. (_laughing_). Oh, Jimmy! You’re the same boy still. I’ve been
lonely and cross, too, and I was coming out to try and redeem myself.

MR. R. (_picking up her umbrella, closing it and putting it under his
arm; tucking her hand also under his arm and taking his own umbrella._)
Now, this is real “comfy.” We’ll go together. It’s like old times. This
is “merry Christmas!” What a lark! (_They go out._)

CURTAIN.


THE END.




SONGS WORTH WHILE

_For School, Home, and All Kinds of Entertainments_

Price, $1.00


[Illustration]

A collection of 159 old familiar songs that all the world loves to
sing—American patriotic airs, folk songs and ballads of many lands,
college and glee club ditties both sentimental and humorous, plantation
songs and Negro spirituals, songs of the sea, and a few juvenile and
sacred numbers. Words and complete piano music are given for each
selection. Careful editing is one of the strong points of this admirable
collection. Printed on a good quality of paper, well bound to open flat,
size 7 by 10¼ inches, with a stout paper cover in colors.

    Partial Contents: Ah! I Have Sighed to Rest Me; Alice, Where
    Art Thou?; A-Roving; Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young
    Charms; Ben Bolt; Bold Fisherman; Boola Song; Campbells Are
    Comin’; Co-Ca-Che-Lunk; Come Back to Erin; Come, with Thy
    Lute; Comin’ thro’ the Rye; Cousin Jedediah; Cruiskeen Lawn;
    Darling Nelly Gray; Dear Evelina; De Camptown Races; Deep
    River; De Golden Wedding; Drum Major of Schneider’s Band; Faded
    Coat of Blue; Flow Gently, Sweet Afton; For He’s a Jolly Good
    Fellow; Gaily the Troubadour; Girl I Left Behind Me; Good-bye
    to Summer; Grandfather’s Clock; Hail, Hail! the Gang’s All
    Here; Harp That Once Thro’ Tara’s Halls; Home, Home, Can I
    Forget Thee?; I Cannot Sing the Old Songs; I’ve Lost My Doggy;
    Juanita; Killarney; Kingdom Comin’; Larboard Watch; Lily Dale;
    Listen to the Mocking Bird; Little Brown Jug; Long, Long, Ago;
    Mandolin Song; Marseillaise; McSorley’s Twins; Michael Roy;
    Minka; Mollie Darling; My Last Cigar; Oh, Come, Come Away; Oh,
    Dem Golden Slippers!; Oh, My Darling Clementine; Old Zip Coon;
    Over the Banister; Polly-Wolly-Doodle; Quilting Party; Reuben
    and Rachel; Rocked in the Cradle of the Deep; Rumsty Ho!; Sally
    in Our Alley; See, the Conquering Hero Comes; Sleep, Baby,
    Sleep; Soldier’s Farewell; Solomon Levi; Spanish Cavalier;
    Steal Away; Sweet and Low; Sweet Genevieve; Swing Low, Sweet
    Chariot; There Is a Tavern in the Town; There’s a Meeting Here
    To-night.

                   T. S. DENISON & COMPANY _Publishers_
                      623 South Wabash Ave. CHICAGO




DENISON’S CHRISTMAS SONGS and CAROLS

_For All Kinds of Indoor and Outdoor Christmas Programs_

Price, 40 Cents


[Illustration]

An attractive collection of thirty-two Christmas carols, hymns, and
juvenile songs, practically all being old favorites, with the addition
of one or two new numbers. Just what teachers and musical directors need
when they want to brighten up a Christmas exercise, play, or dialogue
with an appropriate song. It contains a fine selection of song material
for community Christmas tree celebrations, and church, school, lodge, and
home programs. Each selection has an easy and practicable accompaniment.
The book is carefully edited, and printed on a good quality of paper,
well bound to open flat, with pages 7 by 10¼ inches, and a stout paper
cover handsomely designed in two colors.

    Contents: Angels From the Realms of Glory; As With Gladness Men
    of Old; Away in a Manger; Brightest and Best of the Sons of the
    Morning; Carol, Brothers, Carol; A Child Is Born in Bethlehem;
    Christians, Awake! Salute the Happy Morn; Christmas Is Here;
    The Christmas Tree; Deck the Halls With Boughs of Holly; The
    First Christmas; The First Nowel; God Rest Ye, Merry Gentlemen;
    Good King Wenceslas; Hang Up the Baby’s Stocking; Hark! the
    Herald Angels Sing; Hark! What Mean Those Holy Voices?; Jolly
    Old Saint Nicholas; Joy to the World; In Bethlehem a Babe Is
    Born; It Came Upon the Midnight Clear; O Come, All Ye Faithful;
    O Little Town of Bethlehem; O Sanctissima!; O Verdant Pine!;
    Silent Night! Holy Night!; Up on the House-Top; The Wassail
    Song; We’re Going Home for Christmas; We Three Kings of Orient
    Are; What Child Is This?; While Shepherds Watched Their Flocks.

                   T.S. DENISON & COMPANY _Publishers_
                      623 South Wabash Ave. CHICAGO




                             Denison’s Plays
                            _Cover the Field_

                               Hundreds of
                                Titles in
                               these Series

                              [Illustration]

                            Send for Complete
                               Descriptive
                                Catalogue

                   T.S. DENISON & COMPANY _Publishers_
                      623 South Wabash Ave. CHICAGO




                                Denison’s
                               Plays _stand
                                   for_
                                 Quality

                              [Illustration]

                            Send for Complete
                          Descriptive Catalogue

                   T. S. DENISON & COMPANY _Publishers_
                      623 South Wabash Ave. CHICAGO

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YULETIDE ENTERTAINMENTS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
